![](NEPE_Coat--Buffalo.jpg "NEPE_Coat--Buffalo.jpg")

A **buffalo coat** is a heavy winter garment made from the
[bison](bison "wikilink"), which also commonly known as the "buffalo"
(though not closely related to African or Asian buffaloes). In North
America they descended from the simpler, sleeveless [buffalo
robes](buffalo_robes "wikilink") worn by the [Indigenous peoples of
North America](Indigenous_peoples_of_North_America "wikilink") prior to
their partial replacement by [capotes](Capote_(garment) "wikilink") made
of [point blankets](point_blanket "wikilink") during the [North American
fur trade](North_American_fur_trade "wikilink"). Similar garments were
also used across Eurasia prior to the gradual displacement and
near-extinction of the [European bison or
wisent](European_bison "wikilink"). Commercially produced coats with
sleeves and buttons became popular with non-indigenous people during the
early settlement period of the [American West](American_West "wikilink")
and the [Canadian prairies](Canadian_prairies "wikilink"). Their use
mostly ended because of a rising [conservationist
movement](conservationist_movement "wikilink") intended to preserve the
bison, which had been hunted to near-extinction in North America as
well.

Buffalo coats were issued to police and military officers, particularly
the [Royal Canadian Mounted
Police](Royal_Canadian_Mounted_Police "wikilink") and the [United States
Army](United_States_Army "wikilink"), prior to their replacement by
[parkas](parka "wikilink"). The coats were intended for use in extreme
cold or arctic conditions.[1] The RCMP (and other Canadian police
services) briefly revived them in the 1930s when 700 hides were donated
by the [Canadian parks service](Canadian_parks_service "wikilink").
[Guards on Parliament Hill](Ceremonial_Guard "wikilink") continued to
wear them until 1961. With the growing numbers of farmed bison being
raised since the 1990s, buffalo coats are once again available, though
they are much more expensive and many times heavier than modern winter
wear made of manmade fabrics.

Canadian political commentator [Tom
Flanagan](Tom_Flanagan_(political_scientist) "wikilink") wears one daily
during the winter at the University of Calgary where he teaches, and in
2013 wore it during a panel discussion on the CBC, which drew media
attention.[2]

## Gallery

<File:Buffalo> soldiers1.jpg\|[Buffalo
soldiers](Buffalo_soldier "wikilink") some wearing buffalo coats, Ft.
Keogh, Montana 1890 <File:Dog> Child, a North West Mounted Police scout,
and his wife, The Only Handsome Woman, members of the Blackfoot Nation,
Gleichen, Alberta, ca. 1890.jpg\|[North-West Mounted
Police](North-West_Mounted_Police "wikilink") scout wearing a buffalo
coat. Gleichen, Alberta, ca. 1890 <File:Bison> jacket front.jpg\|modern
buffalo coat front (2008) <File:Bison> jacket back.jpg\|modern buffalo
coat back (2008)

## References

## External links

[Category:United States Army
uniforms](Category:United_States_Army_uniforms "wikilink")
[Category:Royal Canadian Mounted
Police](Category:Royal_Canadian_Mounted_Police "wikilink")
[Category:Canadian fashion](Category:Canadian_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Western wear](Category:Western_wear "wikilink")
[Category:Bison](Category:Bison "wikilink")
[Category:Hides](Category:Hides "wikilink")

[1]

[2]