![](Dorothy_Levitt_Frontspiece_to_The_Woman_and_the_Car.jpg "fig:Dorothy_Levitt_Frontspiece_to_The_Woman_and_the_Car.jpg"),
early motoring 'scorcher' and advisor on what to wear\]\] A **car coat**
is an outer garment originally made to be worn by automobile drivers and
passengers. First designed to provide maximum warmth and coverage, over
time it became a much shorter garment. Today it describes a coat that
typically ends at mid thigh. It is worn by both men and women.

While fur, leather and heavy wool were preferred in the early days,
today the coat may be made in a wide variety of materials. In the period
after [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), it took on design
elements of the jeep coat worn by servicemen and this is when the
shorter length became common. As car ownership grew so did the
popularity of the coat; by the 1960s it was described as "ubiquitous".
The car coat remains popular today, both as a functional and a fashion
garment.
![](Automobilists_fur_coats,_Atelier_Bachwitz,_1908-1910.jpg "fig:Automobilists_fur_coats,_Atelier_Bachwitz,_1908-1910.jpg")

## Early history of the car coat

Originally the car coat was more usually termed 'motoring dress'. It
emerged in the early 1900s, when driving was considered an outdoor sport
(most cars were open top) and required protective clothing.[1] Clothing
for men and women and for driver and passenger was relatively similar,
comprising a long heavy coat. This was often in fur or lined with fur,
although sometimes it was in heavy cloth. In summer, women would wear a
[duster coat](duster_coat "wikilink"), sometimes called a dust coat, to
cover their garments, in a cloth such as [linen](linen "wikilink") or
[alpaca wool](Alpaca "wikilink").[2] This would be accessorised with
gloves, goggles and a hat – women often wore elaborate hats and veils,
while men would wear a cap. These accessories were worn year round.[3]
![](Riley_car_with_chauffeur,_c1910.jpg "fig:Riley_car_with_chauffeur,_c1910.jpg")
![](Dorothy_Levitt_demonstrates_how_to_prime_the_carburettor_by_Horace_Nichols,_The_Woman_and_The_Car,_1907.jpg "fig:Dorothy_Levitt_demonstrates_how_to_prime_the_carburettor_by_Horace_Nichols,_The_Woman_and_The_Car,_1907.jpg")
Motoring was still an activity for the elite, however the privations of
driving in a vehicle that broke down frequently and provided no retreat
from the elements, meant clothing had to be functional and warm. Sports
motorist [Dorothy Levitt](Dorothy_Levitt "wikilink") – author of the
1909 handbook *The Woman and the Car* and dubbed 'the fastest woman on
earth' for her 'scorching' (speeding) antics round tracks such as
[Brooklands](Brooklands "wikilink") – provided useful tips for women
drivers on what to wear, along with guidance about the mechanical
aspects of driving. On choosing the right coat, she said: "Under no
circumstance wear lace or fluffy adjuncts to your toilet. There is
nothing like a thick frieze, homespun or tweed coat lined with fur. Do
not heed the cry, 'nothing like leather.' Leather coats do not wear
gracefully."[4]

## 1920s styles

In the 1920s, women continued to favour male motoring dress and this
also crossed over into high fashion. A 1921 article in *[The
Times](The_Times "wikilink")* about the latest Paris fashions described
a red leather motoring coat fastened with metal buckles.[5] Similar
leather coats had been popular for chauffeurs and male motorists for
several years. Fur was still popular, with a fashion correspondent
noting that the [Motor
Show](British_International_Motor_Show "wikilink") in
[Olympia](Olympia_(London) "wikilink") was transforming shop windows
around London. She recommended the latest craze for fur-lined coats in
[tweed](Tweed_(cloth) "wikilink"), [wool velour](Velour "wikilink") and
[cheviot](Cheviot_(cloth) "wikilink"). [Musquash](Muskrat "wikilink")
and [nutria](Nutria_fur "wikilink") were also being chosen by women
motorists, while in [Knightsbridge](Knightsbridge "wikilink"), one new
store was offering women's coats suitable for motoring made from men's
suiting cloth.[6] ![](Zez_Confrey.jpg "fig:Zez_Confrey.jpg") wearing a
fur motoring coat – fur would remain popular driving gear for men and
women\]\] Accessories also followed the unisex trend; *The Times*
described the arrival of neat leather caps as a fashion accessory for
women in 1923.[7] This style of sporty hat was worn in the iconic
[Tamara de Lempicka](Tamara_de_Lempicka "wikilink") self-portrait of
1929 in which she is driving a green [Bugatti](Bugatti "wikilink") with
leather cap and driving gloves – reputed to be based on an
[Hermès](Hermès "wikilink") set that she had seen on the cover of the
magazine *[Vu](Vu_(magazine) "wikilink")*. As this portrait suggests,
and Peter Thorold has noted, the car had become the ultimate symbol of
modernity and emancipation, something that was reflected in the styling
of clothes.[8] Although no coat is visible in the de Lempicka portrait,
by the late 1920s the latest motoring coats from France were worn long,
made of tweed or flannel with narrow leather belts and collars in fur or
flannel.[9] Wide raglan sleeves were popular – allowing freedom of
movement – and collars could be military in style with buttons up to the
neck.[10]

Reporting on fashions in the shops ahead of the 1931 Motor Show, *The
Times* described not only furs, but a new trend for shorter coats – made
of suede and silk lined with [zips](Zipper "wikilink") as fastening –
for walking and motoring.[11] As cars became more common and designs
provided more protection from the elements, clothing reduced in weight
and quantity. However the leather motoring coat remained popular as a
distinct item of dress throughout the 1930s.[12]
![](Man_looks_under_the_hood_of_an_old_jeep_from_world_war_two.jpg "fig:Man_looks_under_the_hood_of_an_old_jeep_from_world_war_two.jpg")

## Postwar designs

The immediate precursor to the postwar (modern) car coat was based
around the [jeep coat](jeep_coat "wikilink"), a design popular in
[wartime](World_War_II "wikilink") for the drivers of open-topped
vehicles. This was generally of a shorter length, ending at mid
thigh.[13]

By the early 1960s, some car coats were being designed in
[nylon](nylon "wikilink"), a report from the British Nylon Spinners'
Fair in London in 1961 described a new washable mock suede car coat with
brushed fleece nylon lining as: "one of the good possibilities" of the
technology.[14] Real leathers remained popular – showerproof suede
models with detachable collars and large leather buttons were being
designed for women by 1964. These were also in the shorter length,
ending at mid thigh.[15] Another new motoring design was the
[roebuck](Roe_deer "wikilink") suede (deerskin) jacket, designed at hip
length for both women and men, and described as a real innovation
because: "A suede upon which grease, alcohol, even motor oil has no
effect is a find indeed."[16]

Warmth was still considered a key component of the car coat, with
water-repellent [poplin](poplin "wikilink") models with padded and
quilted linings being designed for women as "knock-about car coats".
These came complete with detachable hoods and toggle fastenings.[17] Fur
was still being promoted for motorists, but as a prestige item to go
with prestige cars. An advert from 1965 in *The Times* by the National
Fur Company entitled "An ocelot in your Jaguar" said: "We consider that
an important feature of a car coat is its length – about halfway between
a jacket and a 3/4 coat. At this length, it's comfortable to wear when
driving. It doesn't ride up. Or 'seat'. And there is no risk of undue
wear on the seat or back."[18]

## The "ubiquitous" car coat

By the late 1960s, the car coat was an item of leisurewear, rather than
simply a motoring accessory, and was being produced in a variety of
fabrics, including [sheepskin](Shearling "wikilink") and the new
[manmade fur](Fake_fur "wikilink") varieties. A fashion writer
describing the uses of faux fur said: "Apart from coats they are made
into all kinds of leisure wear, of which the now ubiquitous car coat is
a conspicuous example. Derived from the more expensive but still popular
sheepskin jacket, it is usually made from a cotton suedette or brushed
nylon outer fabric lined with an acrylic pile".[19]
![](John_Motson.jpg "fig:John_Motson.jpg") got his first car coat in
1972, subsequently having them tailored in [Savile
Row](Savile_Row "wikilink")\]\]

While women continued to wear the car-coat length – among others – by
the mid 1960s the car coat had become a staple item of the male
wardrobe. Editor of *The Tailor and Cutter* magazine John Taylor,
writing in 1966, said: "The riding mac was the equivalent in the
nineteen twenties and thirties of the car coat of the nineteen fifties
and sixties. If a riding mac was worn there was the suggestion that it
had been bought for a specific purpose. The wearer probably owned a hack
and therefore was not a member of the *hoi polloi*. For similar reasons
today, however submerged in the psyches of their owners the reasons may
lie, there are far more car coats in male wardrobes than there are cars
in garages."[20]

Although the car coat was by now a familiar item, it did not mean it
couldn't be reinvented. Michael Carr, who had designed an
[ergonomic](Ergonomics "wikilink") racing suit for his company's
co-director [Stirling Moss](Stirling_Moss "wikilink") applied first
design principles to add functionality. Made of waterproofed poplin, his
design of 1968 featured a zip front and separate
[velcro](velcro "wikilink") quick fasten strip. Buttons were designed so
they didn't catch on the car [seat belt](seat_belt "wikilink"), gathered
cuffs excluded draughts and pockets were designed to fall on the knee
while seated in the car. There was also an interior deep pocket for
roadmaps.[21] During the 1970s, the car coat continued to be a wardrobe
staple for men, while car coat became a description of cut and length in
women's fashion (often looser and always shorter than a traditional
coat).

### Car coats in popular culture

From the 1980s on, the men's car coat started to symbolise a particular
character or walk of life on British TV and in the press, especially
when worn in sheepskin or camel hair. Sheepskin was the style favoured
by [Del Boy](Del_Boy "wikilink") in *[Only Fools &
Horses](Only_Fools_&_Horses "wikilink")* and by
[football](Association_football "wikilink") managers. It was also worn
by detectives in *[The Sweeney](The_Sweeney "wikilink")*.[22][23] Later,
the *[Life on Mars](Life_on_Mars_(UK_TV_series) "wikilink")* detective
series, in which the hero is transported back to the 1970s, would
reprise the car coat by giving DCI [Gene Hunt](Gene_Hunt "wikilink") a
scruffy version in camel wool.[24] More celebrated still are the
trademarked sheepskin car coats worn by BBC football commentator [John
Motson](John_Motson "wikilink") – he wore his first in 1972, acquired
from a furrier he met at a party in Chelsea, and subsequently had them
made on [Savile Row](Savile_Row "wikilink").[25] It had become such a
shorthand description for British football pundits by the late 1990s
that a *Times* feature about the warm-up for the 1998 World Cup began
with the description: "Paul Sexton, our man in the sheepskin car coat,
on the tournament for the World Cup".[26]
![](Anna_Sui_Fall-Winter_2010_084.jpg "fig:Anna_Sui_Fall-Winter_2010_084.jpg")
shearling car coat at Fall 2010 [New York Fashion
Week](New_York_Fashion_Week "wikilink")\]\]

## Fashion revivals

In the late 1990s the car coat attracted attention as a fashion
curiosity when [Liam Gallagher](Liam_Gallagher "wikilink") wore a
sheepskin model to the [Brit Awards](Brit_Awards "wikilink"); [Craig
David](Craig_David "wikilink") wore a similar design in
2001.[27][28][29] The car coat length has remained popular since 2008 –
with *[GQ](GQ "wikilink")* citing the "*[Mad Men](Mad_Men "wikilink")*
effect" as a contributor to the revival of more formal and retro
styles.[30]

In 2010-11, it was popular on the catwalks for both men's and women's
coats.[31][32] Some versions were in fur and
[shearling](shearling "wikilink") (sheepskin), as well as in camel
colourways. In 2013, it was described as the best coat length of the
season.[33]

## References

## External links

-   [Tamara de Lempicka self-portrait in green
    Bugatti](http://www.wikiart.org/en/tamara-de-lempicka/portrait-in-the-green-bugatti-1925)
-   [Archive John Rawlings fashion images of women wearing car coats,
    from
    Petrolicious](http://www.petrolicious.com/dress-to-drive-photography-by-john-rawlings)
-   [Vintage sheepskin car coats at The
    Weejun](http://www.theweejun.com/the-ivy-shearling-car-coat-sawyer-of-napa/)

[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of the
automobile](Category:History_of_the_automobile "wikilink")
[Category:1900s fashion](Category:1900s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1910s fashion](Category:1910s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1920s fashion](Category:1920s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1930s fashion](Category:1930s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1950s fashion](Category:1950s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1960s fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1970s fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2000s fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2010s fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Coats (clothing)](Category:Coats_(clothing) "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]