![](Grande_Armée_-_Light_Infantry_Officers_in_Greatcoats.jpg "fig:Grande_Armée_-_Light_Infantry_Officers_in_Greatcoats.jpg")
wearing greatcoats.\]\]

A **greatcoat**, also known as a watchcoat, is a large
[overcoat](overcoat "wikilink") that is typically made of wool designed
for warmth and protection against the weather. Its collar and cuffs can
be turned out to protect the face and hands from cold and rain, and the
short cape around the shoulders provides extra warmth and repels
rainwater (if made of a [waterproof](waterproof "wikilink") material).
During the 17th and 18th centuries and the [Industrial
Revolution](Industrial_Revolution "wikilink"), greatcoats became
available for all social classes. It was popular in the 19th century as
a [military uniform](military_uniform "wikilink") and casual wear for
the wealthy, and is still issued for inclement weather by many [armed
forces](armed_forces "wikilink") around the world.

The coat generally hangs down below the knees and the cape is kept
short, normally just above or below the elbows. It also sports deep
pockets for keeping letters and food dry. It is typically coloured grey,
though other colours may be used (e.g. black, brown, navy blue). One
type of greatcoat is the Petersham (named after [Viscount
Petersham](Viscount_Petersham "wikilink")[1]).

## Gallery

<File:French> cavalry man's cloak from 1812.JPG\|1812 French dragoon
greatcoat with cloak <File:Photo> of William Fane De Salis (1812-1896)
with a shotgun, in a greatcoat, circa 1890.jpg\|[William Fane De
Salis](William_Andrew_Salius_Fane_de_Salis "wikilink") (1812-1896) with
a shotgun, c. 1890, (Dawley Court, Middlesex, UK).
<File:Bundeswehrmuseum> Dresden
19.jpg\|[Bundeswehr](Bundeswehr "wikilink") greatcoats from the 1960s.
<File:Vladimir> Putin 21 February 2002-3.jpg\|Greatcoats worn by
[Russian Border Guards](Border_Guard_Service_of_Russia "wikilink") being
reviewed by President [Vladimir Putin](Vladimir_Putin "wikilink") at a
military parade <File:Sir> Cyril Newall and Lord Londonderry in
France.jpg\|[Royal Air Force](Royal_Air_Force "wikilink") officers
wearing greatcoats, inspecting an aircraft in France <File:Yalta>
Conference cropped.jpg\|[Joseph Stalin](Joseph_Stalin "wikilink")
wearing a uniform greatcoat at [Yalta](Yalta "wikilink"), 1945
<File:John> Barrowman as Captain Jack Harkness at Cardiff Bay (2,
cropped).jpg\|Fictional character [Jack
Harkness](Jack_Harkness "wikilink") is known for wearing a greatcoat
<File:Guarding> the Crown Jewels (6645853609).jpg\|A sentry of the
[Coldstream Guards](Coldstream_Guards "wikilink") at the [Tower of
London](Tower_of_London "wikilink") in a greatcoat in December 2011
<File:Soldier> in greatcoat (3774187).jpg\|British [WWI](WWI "wikilink")
soldier wearing an army issue greatcoat

## See also

-   [Trench coat](Trench_coat "wikilink")

## References

[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Coats
(clothing)](Category:Coats_(clothing) "wikilink") [Category:Military
uniforms](Category:Military_uniforms "wikilink")

[1]