A **Guards Coat** or **Guard's Coat** (sometimes **Guardsman's coat**)
is a men's [Overcoat](Overcoat "wikilink") which has a half belt in the
back,[1] and is based on the coat that used to be worn by English
Officers of the Guard.[2] It is a double-breasted garment in either a
6x3 (more traditional) or 6x2 (more formal) configuration; in a 6x3
configuration, all three working buttons can be fastened, or just the
bottom two.[3] The half-belt can be adjusted with buttons (more
traditional) or sewn in place (more formal). The Guards Coat has either
an Ulster collar (more traditional) or peaked lapels (more formal),
turn-back cuffs (traditional) or button cuffs (formal), and welt or flap
pockets.[4] It comes mostly in formal colours such as a deep navy or
[midnight blue](midnight_blue "wikilink"), and is more formal than the
more countrified [Ulster coat](Ulster_coat "wikilink").[5] These
features mean that in its most formal configuration, it is largely
similar to a [Paletot](Paletot "wikilink") or double-breasted
[Chesterfield coat](Chesterfield_coat "wikilink"), being distinguished
primarily by its color and the presence of the half-belt in back; in its
most traditional configuration, it is similar to a military
[greatcoat](greatcoat "wikilink") but without epaulets, or to a capeless
[Ulster coat](Ulster_coat "wikilink") but with a half-belt, different
pockets and more formal fabric.[6]

## References

[Category:Coats (clothing)](Category:Coats_(clothing) "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]