McIntosh}}

The **Mackintosh** or **raincoat** (abbreviated as mac) is a form of
waterproof [raincoat](raincoat "wikilink"), first sold in 1824, made out
of [rubberised](rubber "wikilink") [fabric](textile "wikilink").[1]

The Mackintosh is named after its [Scottish](Scotland "wikilink")
inventor [Charles Macintosh](Charles_Macintosh "wikilink"), although
many writers added a letter *k*. The variant spelling of "Mackintosh" is
now standard.[2]

Although the Mackintosh coat style has become generic, a genuine
Mackintosh coat is made from rubberised or rubber laminated material.

## History

![](Carson,_Pirie,_Scott_&_Co._Macintosh,_1893.jpg "Carson,_Pirie,_Scott_&_Co._Macintosh,_1893.jpg")

It has been claimed that the material was invented by the surgeon [James
Syme](James_Syme "wikilink"), but then copied and patented by [Charles
Macintosh](Charles_Macintosh "wikilink");[3] Syme's method of creating
the solvent from coal tar was published in Thomson's *Annals of
Philosophy* in 1818;[4] this paper also describes the dissolution of
[natural rubber](natural_rubber "wikilink") in naphtha.

However, an exhaustive history of the invention of the Mackintosh was
published by Schurer in 1952.[5] The essence of Macintosh's process was
the sandwiching of an impermeable layer of a solution of rubber in
naphtha (derived from tar) between two layers of fabric. Syme did not
propose the sandwich idea and his paper did not mention waterproofing.
Waterproofing garments with rubber was an old idea, and was practised in
pre-Columbian times by Aztecs, who impregnated fabric with
[latex](Natural_rubber#Prehistoric_uses "wikilink"). Later, French
scientists made balloons gas-tight (and incidentally, impermeable) by
impregnating fabric with rubber dissolved in turpentine, but this
solvent was not satisfactory for making apparel.

In 1830 Macintosh's company merged with the clothing company of [Thomas
Hancock](Thomas_Hancock_(inventor) "wikilink") in
[Manchester](Manchester "wikilink"). Hancock had also been experimenting
with rubber coated fabrics since 1819. Production of rubberised coats
soon spread all over the UK. Every kind of coat was produced with
rubberized material including [riding coats](riding_coat "wikilink") and
coats supplied to the British Army, British railways, and UK police
forces.

Early coats had problems with smell, stiffness, and a tendency to melt
in hot weather, but Hancock further improved his waterproof fabrics,
patenting a method for [vulcanising](sulfur_vulcanisation "wikilink")
rubber in 1843 which solved many of the problems.[6]

![](Mackintosh-store.jpg "fig:Mackintosh-store.jpg"), London.\]\]
Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, the company continued to make
waterproof clothing. In 1925 the company was taken over by [Dunlop
Rubber](Dunlop_Rubber "wikilink").[7]

## Revival

In the mid-1990s the Mackintosh brand owner, Traditional Weatherwear,
was on the verge of closing its factory in
[Blairlinn](Blairlinn "wikilink"), [Cumbernauld](Cumbernauld "wikilink")
near Glasgow.[8] Around the turn of the 21st century, senior staff
members acquired the company and established the traditional rubberised
Mackintosh coat as an upmarket brand in its own right. The company
collaborated with leading [fashion](Fashion_design "wikilink") houses
such as [Gucci](Gucci "wikilink"), [Hermès](Hermès "wikilink"), [Louis
Vuitton](Louis_Vuitton "wikilink"), and
[Liberty](Liberty_(department_store) "wikilink"). The coats became
particularly popular with Japanese women, and the company won a [Queen's
Award for Enterprise](Queen's_Award_for_Enterprise "wikilink") in 2000
for its success in international trade.[9] In December 2003 the company
name was formally changed to Mackintosh.

In 2007, Mackintosh was bought by Tokyo firm Yagi Tsusho.[10] With the
backing of its parent company Mackintosh has continued to expand its
reputation and marketing operations. In January 2011, the company opened
its first fashion store in London.[11]

In 2017, Mackintosh expanded to include a premium fashion-oriented line
headed by Bulgarian designer [Kiko
Kostadinov](Kiko_Kostadinov "wikilink"), titled Mackintosh 0001. These
new lines of fashion both included male and female lines of clothing.

## Bibliography

-   "The Macintosh—the Paternity of an Invention" by H. Schurer,
    *Transactions of the Newcomen Society*, 1951–53 Vol 28.

## References

## External links

-   Thomas Hancock. *Personal Narrative of the Origin and Progress of
    the Caoutchouc or India-Rubber Manufacture in England*, 1857,
    London: Longman, Brown, Green, Longmanns & Roberts. [Complete e-text
    scanned and edited by L.
    Element.](https://web.archive.org/web/20070922112012/http://www.lakelandelements.com/rainwearhistory/hancock_personal_narrative.htm)–
    autobiography of the leading UK pioneer of rubber and
    rubber-proofing technology.
-   [Excerpts from "The Macintosh: the Paternity of an
    Invention"](https://web.archive.org/web/20091215015110/http://www.newcomen.com/excerpts/macintosh/index.htm)
-   [The Macintosh Factory in Manchester – Outline
    history](https://web.archive.org/web/20080513191821/http://www.lakelandelements.com/rainwearhistory/macintoshfactory.htm)
-   [Mackintosh
    Rainwear](https://web.archive.org/web/20060624204207/http://www.mackintoshrainwear.com/History.htm)
-   [Timeline of rubber
    development](https://web.archive.org/web/20071030182223/http://www.bouncing-balls.com/timeline/timeline3.htm)

[Category:Coats (clothing)](Category:Coats_(clothing) "wikilink")
[Category:Clothing companies of
Scotland](Category:Clothing_companies_of_Scotland "wikilink")
[Category:Scottish clothing](Category:Scottish_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Scottish inventions](Category:Scottish_inventions "wikilink")
[Category:Clothing companies of the United
Kingdom](Category:Clothing_companies_of_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")

[1]

[2] *Shorter Oxford English Dictionary*, 6th ed. (2008)p. 1668

[3]

[4] [Thomson, T., Phillips, R., & Brayley, E. (1818). Article V: on a
substance from coal tar. *Annals Of Philosophy*, XII,
112–113](https://books.google.com/books?id=tGY7AQAAIAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=annals+of+philosophy+volume+12+thomson+1818&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj1ua-i8OLLAhWFFpQKHTPKBUEQ6AEIHDAA#v=onepage&q=annals%20of%20philosophy%20volume%2012%20thomson%201818&f=false)

[5] "The Macintosh: The Paternity of an Invention". *Transactions of the
Newcomen Society*, 28(1), pp. 77–87
[1](http://www.maneyonline.com/doi/abs/10.1179/tns.1951.005)

[6] [2](http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/life/return-of-the-mac-28065280.html)

[7] [3](http://www.competition/commission.org.uk/rep_pub/reports/1950_1959/fulltext/012c18.pdf)

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]