A **riding coat** or **jacket** is a garment originally designed as
outerwear for [horseback riding](Equestrianism "wikilink"). It protects
the wearer's upper clothes from dirt and wear and in some cases provide
additional protection in the case of falls.

## History

### East Asia

The [Manchu](Manchu_people "wikilink") "[horse
jacket](magua_(clothing) "wikilink")" (*magua*) was a dark blue riding
coat worn by [Manchurian](Manchuria "wikilink") horsemen before becoming
a staple item of [menswear](menswear "wikilink") across the [Qing
Empire](Qing_Empire "wikilink"). It subsequently developed into the
[Burmese](Burmese_clothing "wikilink") [taikpon](taikpon "wikilink") and
the [Chinese](Chinese_clothing "wikilink")
[tangzhuang](tangzhuang "wikilink").

### Britain

<img src="Coldstream_Festival_-_The_Horses_and_riders_-_geograph.org.uk_-_976319_cropped.jpg" title="fig:Coldstream_Festival_-_The_Horses_and_riders_-_geograph.org.uk_-_976319_cropped.jpg" width="200" alt="Coldstream_Festival_-_The_Horses_and_riders_-_geograph.org.uk_-_976319_cropped.jpg" />\]\]
![](Riding_coat_MET_1976.147.1_1976.147.2.jpeg "fig:Riding_coat_MET_1976.147.1_1976.147.2.jpeg")\]\]
Original waterproof designs – similar to a
[mackintosh](mackintosh "wikilink") – generally comprised a full-length
coat with wide skirt and leg straps to keep it in place. Other typical
features included a belted waist, large patch pockets with protective
flap, [raglan sleeves](raglan_sleeve "wikilink") with tab and wind cuff,
fly front, throat tab and a broad collar.

In 1823 [Charles Macintosh](Charles_Macintosh "wikilink") (1766–1843)
patented his invention for waterproof rubberised cloth, pressing
together two sheets of cotton material with dissolved India-rubber
sandwiched in between. It was a brilliant idea for making any fabric
weatherproof, and the very first macintosh coats were made at the
family's dyestuffs factory, Charles Macintosh and Co of Glasgow.

The rubber processing pioneer [Thomas
Hancock](Thomas_Hancock_(inventor) "wikilink") (1786–1865) was aware of
Macintosh’s work and in 1825 he took out a licence to manufacture the
patented "waterproof double textures". For historical background, refer
to the hardback "The Hancocks of Marlborough"[1] and website "Bouncing
Balls", author John Loadman[2]

Using masticated scrap rubber instead, Hancock's solutions had a higher
rubber content than those of Macintosh and so could more readily give a
uniform film on the cloth, minimising water penetration and odour.

Eventually the two men co-operated, so that in 1831 Hancock became a
partner in Charles Macintosh & Co and their two companies merged. One
feature of the co-operation was the construction of an automated
spreading machine to replace Macintosh’s original paint brushes. In 1834
Hancock's London factory burned down and Macintosh had already closed
the Glasgow factory, hence all the work transferred to Manchester. See
the "Virtual Encyclopedia of Greater Manchester"[3]

From then on, the manufacturing of "proper" raincoats or macs impervious
to all weathers – constructed of two layers of rubber-coated cotton
fabric or "double textured" – was concentrated, with all necessary
expertise and experience, in Manchester or the Lancastrian cotton towns.
There such rubber or rubberised products amounted to a "cottage
industry", as confirmed by the abundance of company records in the
National Archives at Kew, Surrey.

Classic, belted, double-textured trench coats in off-white or fawn for
riding or walking were fashionable prior to World War 2 until the end of
the century as a specifically British fashion, flattering the human form
and enhancing its magnetism. To see typical wartime usage, a good
reference is [Danger UXB](Danger_UXB "wikilink") ([Anthony
Andrews](Anthony_Andrews "wikilink")), Thames Television's acclaimed
drama series first broadcast in the late 1970s, or the 1976 movie [The
Eagle Has Landed (film)](The_Eagle_Has_Landed_(film) "wikilink")
([Donald Sutherland](Donald_Sutherland "wikilink")). The military
flavour of rubberised raincoats continued with the 1997 programme
[Bodyguards (TV series)](Bodyguards_(TV_series) "wikilink") (as sported
by [John Shrapnel](John_Shrapnel "wikilink") playing Commander MacIntyre
of the elite protection team).

A model pictured in the December 1944 issue of [Vogue
(magazine)](Vogue_(magazine) "wikilink") showed the attractiveness and
practicality of these macs for the fashion-conscious, whilst they
appeared in favourite 1950s and 1960s feature films such as [Genevieve
(film)](Genevieve_(film) "wikilink") (1953) (worn by [Dinah
Sheridan](Dinah_Sheridan "wikilink")), [Me and the
Colonel](Me_and_the_Colonel "wikilink") (1958) ([Nicole
Maurey](Nicole_Maurey "wikilink")) and [Twice Round the
Daffodils](Twice_Round_the_Daffodils "wikilink") (1962) ([Sheila
Hancock](Sheila_Hancock "wikilink")), always sharp, clean, rustling and
making a bold statement.

Meanwhile, traditional gentlemen's outfitters such as Cordings,
[Hackett](Hackett_London "wikilink") and [Gieves &
Hawkes](Gieves_&_Hawkes "wikilink") continued to sell plenty of smart
walking coats in thick rubberised cotton, very popular at the time.
Common in Britain around 1960 were neat zipper jackets for young and
old, frequently with pinched waist, and hooded anoraks in the same
materials - the latter in dark green for scouting, hiking, climbing,
canoeing and yet more of the great outdoors.

Developing on from that, double-textured "gangster" macs were the
must-have, trendy outerwear for girls with chutzpah around 1970, having
originated with the Valstar "Gangster" brand designed by Maurice
Attwood.

Featuring a signature yoke front and back, a belt and peplum, and
wriststraps with buckles, these styles were sold in a range of colours,
different lengths, and either cotton or viscose, at major high street
stores like Debenhams (under their Debroyal brand) and C&A (Vivienne
style) at prices from £10 to £20. The snazzy yoked design was all the
rage among the younger set, even appearing in suitably small sizes for
daughters proud to copy their mums.

This or a similar style of rainwear graced the foremost actors and
actresses of the time. Cinema films included [Country Dance
(film)](Country_Dance_(film) "wikilink") (1970) ([Susannah
York](Susannah_York "wikilink")), [Hoffman
(film)](Hoffman_(film) "wikilink") (1970) ([Sinéad
Cusack](Sinéad_Cusack "wikilink")), No Blade of Grass (1970) ([Nigel
Davenport](Nigel_Davenport "wikilink"), [Jean
Wallace](Jean_Wallace "wikilink"), [Lynne
Frederick](Lynne_Frederick "wikilink")), The Ragman's Daughter (1972)
([Victoria Tennant](Victoria_Tennant "wikilink")) and [All Creatures
Great and Small (film)](All_Creatures_Great_and_Small_(film) "wikilink")
(1974) ([Lisa Harrow](Lisa_Harrow "wikilink"), [Simon
Ward](Simon_Ward "wikilink")). Examples of the many TV series in that
period containing Valstar “Gangster” type double-textured rainwear were
[Take Three Girls](Take_Three_Girls "wikilink") ([Liza
Goddard](Liza_Goddard "wikilink")), [The Lotus Eaters (TV
series)](The_Lotus_Eaters_(TV_series) "wikilink") ([Wanda
Ventham](Wanda_Ventham "wikilink")) and [Man About the
House](Man_About_the_House "wikilink") ([Paula
Wilcox](Paula_Wilcox "wikilink")).

Since they provided effective insulation against the cold, the garments
were later called “winter macs” by females, who would wear them
buttoned, with upturned short collar and - to complete the look - a
neckerchief giving a bright, contrasting slash of colour.

The retro "gangster" style has been revived as the "Chorlton" in a
choice of five colours by Lakeland Elements of Lancaster, since
Chorlton-upon-Medlock, now part of Greater Manchester, was the location
of one of the early macintosh factories.

Other design initiatives and variants over the years included the
introduction of “light double-textured” and “single-textured” rubberised
macs, again in many hues. There were ponchos, military-style capes and
more recently the short, navy blue [Margaret
Howell](Margaret_Howell "wikilink") hoody. Then, on the Continent of
Europe, you would see the green hooded anorak or slicker, with yellow
rubber lining, as worn by Anne-Laure Meury in the classic French
relationship movie [The Aviator's Wife](The_Aviator's_Wife "wikilink")
(1981) and the similarly unisex Friesennerz reversible hooded anorak in
yellow rubber with blue (sometimes fawn) lining, sold on Germany’s high
streets and sported by [Glenda Jackson](Glenda_Jackson "wikilink") in
her 1978 film The Class of Miss MacMichael. Certainly the latter mac was
beloved by young tourists of German nationality making pilgrimage to the
fashion mecca of the Swinging Sixties, Carnaby Street in London W1.

## References

[Category:Fashion design](Category:Fashion_design "wikilink")
[Category:Coats (clothing)](Category:Coats_(clothing) "wikilink")
[Category:Clothing industry](Category:Clothing_industry "wikilink")

[1] "The Hancocks of Marlborough" by John Loadman & Francis James,
Oxford University Press, 2009

[2]

[3]