![](Lab_coat_and_scrubs.jpg "Lab_coat_and_scrubs.jpg")

A **white coat**, also known as a **laboratory coat**, is a knee-length
overcoat/[smock](Smock-frock "wikilink") worn by professionals in the
[medical](medicine "wikilink") field or by those involved in
[laboratory](laboratory "wikilink") work. The coat protects their street
clothes and also serves as a simple uniform. The garment is made from
white or light-colored [cotton](cotton "wikilink"),
[linen](linen "wikilink"), or cotton [polyester](polyester "wikilink")
blend, allowing it to be washed at high temperature and making it easy
to see if it is clean.

Similar coats are a symbol of learning in Argentina and Uruguay, where
they are worn by both students and teachers in state schools. In
[Tunisia](Tunisia "wikilink") and [Mozambique](Mozambique "wikilink"),
teachers wear white coats to protect their street clothes from chalk.

Like the word "[suit](suit_(clothing) "wikilink")", the phrase "white
coat" is sometimes used as a [synecdoche](synecdoche "wikilink") to
denote the wearer, such as a scientist working in a high-tech company.

## Medicine

White coats are sometimes seen as the distinctive dress of both
[physicians](physician "wikilink") and [surgeons](surgeon "wikilink"),
who have worn them for over 100 years.[1] In the nineteenth century,
respect for the certainty of science was in stark contrast to the
[quackery](quackery "wikilink") and
[mysticism](Medieval_medicine "wikilink") of nineteenth century
medicine. To emphasize the transition to the more scientific approach of
modern medicine, physicians began to represent themselves as scientists,
donning the most recognizable symbol of the scientist, the white
laboratory coat.[2]

Recently, [white coat ceremonies](white_coat_ceremony "wikilink") have
become popular amongst those starting [medical
school](medical_school "wikilink").

The modern white coat was introduced to medicine in the late 1800s as a
symbol of cleanliness.[3][4]

### Patient perceptions

A study conducted in the United Kingdom found that the majority of
patients prefer their doctors to wear white coats, but the majority of
doctors prefer other clothing, such as
[scrubs](scrubs_(clothing) "wikilink").[5] The study found that
psychiatrists were among the least likely to wear white coats and when
they are worn, they are typically worn over the scrubs. Some medical
doctors view the coats as hot and uncomfortable, and many feel that they
spread infection.[6]

### White coat hypertension

Some patients who have their blood pressure measured in a clinical
setting have higher readings than they do when measured in a home
setting. This is apparently a result of patients feeling more relaxed
when they are at home. The phenomenon is sometimes called "[white coat
hypertension](white_coat_hypertension "wikilink")," in reference to the
home traditional white coats worn in a clinical setting, though the
coats themselves may have nothing to do with the elevated readings.[7]

### Psychiatry

The term is also used as verbal shorthand for psychiatric
[orderlies](orderly "wikilink") or other personnel and may be used, in a
usually jocular manner, to imply someone's [lunacy](lunatic "wikilink")
or [paranoia](paranoia "wikilink").

### White versus black

![](Tie-dyed_lab_coat.jpg "fig:Tie-dyed_lab_coat.jpg") Until the
mid-1920s, students who were examining cadavers would wear black lab
coats to show respect for the dead. Black lab coats were used in early
biomedical and microbiology laboratories. The "whiteness" and "pureness"
concepts that were established in medicine pervaded that environment at
the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries and physicians
changed the black for the white coat.[8]

### White coat ceremony

A [white coat ceremony](white_coat_ceremony "wikilink") is a relatively
new ritual that marks one's entrance into [medical
school](medical_school "wikilink") and, more recently, into a number of
health-related schools and professions. It originated at [University of
Chicago](University_of_Chicago "wikilink")'s [Pritzker School of
Medicine](Pritzker_School_of_Medicine "wikilink") in 1989[9] and
involves a formal "robing" or "cloaking" in white lab coats.

### Controversy

Studies have shown that doctor's coats worn in hospitals can harbor
contagions including
[MRSA](Methicillin-resistant_Staphylococcus_aureus "wikilink").[10]

In 2007, the UK [National Health
Service](National_Health_Service "wikilink") started banning
long-sleeved coats.[11]

In 2009, the American Medical Association investigated banning coats
with long sleeves to protect patients, but did not institute a ban.[12]

A study published in 2011 investigating the effectiveness of the NHS ban
showed no statistical difference in contamination levels between
residents wearing long-sleeved coats and those wearing short-sleeved
scrubs.[13]

In an effort to reduce the contamination of healthcare uniforms, [ASTM
International](ASTM_International "wikilink") is developing standards to
specifically address liquid penetration resistance, liquid repellency,
bacterial decontamination, and [antimicrobial](antimicrobial "wikilink")
properties of such uniforms.[14]

## In laboratory work

When used in the laboratory, lab coats protect against accidental
spills, e.g., acids. In this case they usually have long sleeves and are
made of an absorbent material, such as cotton, so that the user can be
protected from the chemical. Some lab coats have buttons or elastic at
the end of the sleeves, to secure them around the wrist so that they do
not hang into containers of chemicals. Short-sleeved lab coats also
exist where protection from substances such as acid is not necessary,
and are favoured by certain scientists, such as microbiologists,
avoiding the problem of hanging sleeves altogether, combined with the
ease of washing the forearms (an important consideration in
microbiology).

### Howie coats

![](LGVH_Team_2009c.jpg "fig:LGVH_Team_2009c.jpg") For added safety, a
variant of the lab coat, called a "Howie" style lab coat is often
adopted. It is called such after a 1978 report commissioned by the UK
department of Health and Social Security to codify standard clinical
laboratory practices, chaired by [J. W.
Howie](Sir_James_Howie "wikilink"). Among the codified standards was
protective clothing; the type of wrap-around full coverage lab coat that
had been in use in the UK for over a hundred years was nicknamed the
"Howie-Style" coat to indicate its compliance with the provisions of
this report. It has the buttons on the left flank, elasticated wrists
and a [mandarin collar](mandarin_collar "wikilink"), and is quite
similar to a [chef's uniform](chef's_uniform "wikilink"). It is designed
to minimize pathogen contact with street clothes.

## Use as a school uniform

![](Delantales_blancos_2.jpg "fig:Delantales_blancos_2.jpg") White coats
which resemble lab coats are worn by students and teachers of most
public primary schools as a daily uniform in countries like
[Argentina](Argentina "wikilink"), [Uruguay](Uruguay "wikilink"),
[Spain](Spain "wikilink"), [Bolivia](Bolivia "wikilink") and
[Morocco](Morocco "wikilink"), and in private schools in
[Colombia](Colombia "wikilink"). It also was formerly worn during past
decades in [Paraguay](Paraguay "wikilink") and
[Chile](Chile "wikilink").

## See also

-   [White coat hypertension](White_coat_hypertension "wikilink")
-   [Scrubs (clothing)](Scrubs_(clothing) "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [White coats and the medical
    profession](http://www.mja.com.au/public/issues/174_07_020401/mvdw/mvdw.html)
-   [Lab Coats](https://medicalcoats.com/mens-lab-coats.php)

[Category:Academic dress](Category:Academic_dress "wikilink")
[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:Coats
(clothing)](Category:Coats_(clothing) "wikilink") [Category:Laboratory
equipment](Category:Laboratory_equipment "wikilink")
[Category:Protective gear](Category:Protective_gear "wikilink")

[1] Hardy, Susan and Corones, Anthony, "Dressed to Heal: The Changing
Semiotics of Surgical Dress", *Fashion Theory*, (2015), pp.1-23.
[doi=10.1080/1362704X.2015.1077653](https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1362704X.2015.1077653)

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] Hochberg, M., S. History of medicine The doctor’s white coat—an
historical perspective. American Medical Association Journal of Ethics
April 2007, Volume 9, Number 4: 310-314.[History of
medicine](http://journalofethics.ama-assn.org/2007/04/pdf/mhst1-0704.pdf)

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]