![](A-line_skirt.jpg "fig:A-line_skirt.jpg")
![](Yves_St_Laurent_early_gown_deYoung_Museum_San_Francisco.jpg "fig:Yves_St_Laurent_early_gown_deYoung_Museum_San_Francisco.jpg")

An **A-line** skirt is a [skirt](skirt "wikilink") that is fitted at the
[hips](hip "wikilink") and gradually widens towards the hem, giving the
impression of the shape of a capital letter A. The term is also used to
describe [dresses](dress "wikilink") and
[coats](coat_(clothing) "wikilink") with a similar shape.[1]

## History

The term was first used by the French
[couture](Haute_couture "wikilink") designer [Christian
Dior](Christian_Dior "wikilink") as the label for his collection of
spring 1955.[2] The *A-Line* collection's feature item, then the "most
wanted silhouette in Paris", was a "fingertip-length flared jacket worn
over a dress with a very full, pleated skirt".[3]

Although an A-shape, this silhouette was not identical to what is now
understood to embody the A-line idea.[4] That idea was given its
definitive expression and popularized by Dior's successor, [Yves Saint
Laurent](Yves_Saint_Laurent_(designer) "wikilink"), with his "Trapeze
Line" of spring 1958, which featured dresses flaring out dramatically
from a fitted shoulder line.[5]

A-line clothes remained popular in the 1960s and 70s, disappeared from
fashion almost completely by the early 1980s and were revived by the
retro trend of the late 1990s.[6] By that time, "A-line" was used more
loosely to describe any dress wider at the hips than at the bust or
waist, as well as a number of flared skirt styles.[7] "True" A-line
shapes on the pattern of Dior and Saint Laurent saw a revival in the
early 2000s.[8]

## Style details

The A-line skirt has no visible embellishments for ease, such as
[pleats](pleat "wikilink") or slits, but is fitted to the upper hip by
means of [seams](seam_(sewing) "wikilink") and/or
[darts](dart_(sewing) "wikilink"). However, denim A-line skirts often
have buttons down the center seam. Its fastening is usually kept
discreet, with a side or back [zipper](zipper "wikilink"). A
[belt](belt_(clothing) "wikilink") is sometimes used.
[Pockets](Pocket "wikilink") may be present, but not usually. It can be
cut at any length.

When referring to dresses and coats, the term *A-line* generally means
fitted from the [shoulders](shoulder "wikilink") to the hips and then
widening to the hem, but it is also sometimes used to mean widening from
the shoulders to the hem, ignoring the waist and hips.

It is often used to describe a popular style of [wedding
dress](wedding_dress "wikilink"), which is fitted above and around the
hips but flares gently to the hem, giving a streamlined and quite slim
look.

## Notes

[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Coats
(clothing)](Category:Coats_(clothing) "wikilink") [Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")

[1] [Women's Wear Daily:
Glossary](http://www.wwd.com/fashion-resources/fashion-dictionary)

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]