The ***áo dài*** is a [Vietnamese](Vietnam "wikilink") [national
garment](Folk_costume "wikilink"), worn by both sexes but now most
commonly worn by women. In its current form, it is a tight-fitting
[silk](silk "wikilink") [tunic](tunic "wikilink") worn over trousers.
*Áo* translates as shirt.[1] *Dài* means "long".[2]

The word "ao dai" was originally applied to the outfit worn at the court
of the [Nguyễn Lords](Nguyễn_lords "wikilink") at [Huế](Huế "wikilink")
in the 18th century. This outfit evolved into the *áo ngũ thân*, a
five-paneled [aristocratic](Aristocracy_(class) "wikilink")
[gown](gown "wikilink") worn in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
Inspired by Paris fashions, Nguyễn Cát Tường and other
[Hanoi](Hanoi "wikilink") artists redesigned the *ngũ thân* as a modern
dress in the 1920s and 1930s.[3] The updated look was promoted by the
artists and magazines of [Tự Lực văn đoàn](Tự_Lực_văn_đoàn "wikilink")
(Self-Reliant Literary Group) as a national costume for the modern era.
In the 1950s, [Saigon](Saigon "wikilink") designers tightened the fit to
produce the version worn by [Vietnamese
women](Women_in_Vietnam "wikilink") today.[4] The dress was extremely
popular in [South Vietnam](South_Vietnam "wikilink") in the 1960s and
early 1970s. On [Tết](Tết "wikilink") and other occasions, Vietnamese
men may wear an *[áo gấm](áo_gấm "wikilink")*
([brocade](brocade "wikilink") [robe](robe "wikilink")), a version of
the ao dai made of thicker fabric.

Academic commentary on the ao dai emphasizes the way the dress ties
feminine beauty to Vietnamese nationalism, especially in the form of
"Miss Ao Dai" pageants, popular both among [overseas
Vietnamese](overseas_Vietnamese "wikilink") and in Vietnam itself.[5]
"Ao dai" is one of the few Vietnamese words that appear in
English-language dictionaries.

## Parts of dress

![](Aodai.PNG "fig:Aodai.PNG") *Tà sau*: back flap


*Nút bấm thân áo*: hooks used as fasteners and holes

*Ống tay*: sleeve

*Đường bên*: inside seam

*Nút móc kết thúc*: main hook and hole

*Tà trước*: front flap


*Khuy cổ*: collar button

*Cổ áo*: collar

*Đường may*: seam

*Kích (eo)*: waist

The ao dai can be worn with a *nón lá* (conical leaf hat), a style
associated with Huế. On weddings and other formal occasions, a circular
headgear called a *khăn đóng* is worn.

## Origin

### Before the Nguyen Dynasty

![](Lord_Nguyen_Phuc_Thuan.jpg "fig:Lord_Nguyen_Phuc_Thuan.jpg")
(1653–1675). He is dressed in a cross-collared robe (*[áo giao
lĩnh](áo_giao_lĩnh "wikilink")*) which was commonly worn by all social
castes of Vietnam before the 19th century\]\]

For centuries, peasant women typically wore a halter top () underneath a
blouse or overcoat, alongside a skirt (*váy*).[6] Aristocrats, on the
other hand, favored a cross-collared robe called *[áo giao
lĩnh](áo_giao_lĩnh "wikilink")*, which bore resemblance to [historical
Chinese clothing](Ancient_Chinese_clothing "wikilink").[7][8] In 1744,
Lord [Nguyễn Phúc Khoát](Nguyễn_Phúc_Khoát "wikilink") of
[Huế](Huế "wikilink") decreed that both men and women at his court wear
trousers and a gown with buttons down the front.[9] Writer [Lê Quý
Đôn](Lê_Quý_Đôn "wikilink") described the newfangled outfit as an *áo
dài* (long garment). The members of the southern court were thus
distinguished from the courtiers of the [Trịnh
Lords](Trịnh_Lords "wikilink") in Hanoi, who wore *áo giao lĩnh* with
long skirts.[10]

Chinese Ming style clothing was forced on Vietnamese people by the
[Nguyễn dynasty](Nguyễn_dynasty "wikilink").[11][12][13][14][15][16] The
tunics and trouser clothing of the Han Chinese on the Ming and Qing
tradition was worn by the Vietnamese. However, Han-Chinese clothing is
assembled by several pieces of clothing including both pants and skirts
called Qun (裙) or chang (裳) which is a part of Chinese garments
throughout the history of Han Chinese clothing. The Ao Dai was created
when [tucks](Tuck_(sewing) "wikilink") which were close fitting and
compact were added in the 1920s to this Chinese style.[17] The Chinese
clothing in the form of trousers and tunic were mandated by the
Vietnamese Nguyen government. It was up to the 1920s in Vietnam's north
area in isolated hamlets where skirts were worn.[18] The Chinese Ming
dynasty, Tang dynasty, and Han dynasty clothing was referred to be
adopted by Vietnamese military and bureaucrats by the Nguyen Lord
[Nguyễn Phúc Khoát](Nguyễn_Phúc_Khoát "wikilink") (Nguyen The Tong).[19]
Chinese clothing started influencing Vietnamese dress in the Ly dynasty.
The current Ao Dai was introduced by the Nguyen Lords.[20]

### 19th century

The *áo ngũ thân* had two flaps sewn together in the back, two flaps
sewn together in the front, and a "baby flap" hidden underneath the main
front flap. The gown appeared to have two-flaps with slits on both
sides, features preserved in the later ao dai. Compared to a modern ao
dai, the front and back flaps were much broader and the fit looser and
much shorter. It had a high collar and was buttoned in the same fashion
as a modern ao dai. Women could wear the dress with the top few buttons
undone, revealing a glimpse of their *yếm* underneath.

[File:Trần](File:Trần) Nhân Tông TLĐSXSCĐ.png\|[Tran
dynasty](Tran_dynasty "wikilink") robes as depicted in a section of a
14th-century scroll [File:Giảng](File:Giảng) học đồ.png\|"Giảng học đồ"
(Teaching), 18th century, Hanoi museum of National History. Scholars and
students wear cross-collared gowns (*[áo giao
lĩnh](áo_giao_lĩnh "wikilink")*) - unlike the buttoned áo dài
<File:Femme> annamite coiffure tonkin crop 2.jpg\|The *[áo tứ
thân](áo_tứ_thân "wikilink")* as worn in the North, 1800s <File:Ao> ngu
than on postcard dated 1904.JPG\|Two women wear áo ngũ thân, the form of
the ao dai worn in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries

### 20th century

#### Modernization of style

![](VN_Phat_Diem_tango7174.jpg "fig:VN_Phat_Diem_tango7174.jpg")\]\]

[Huế](Huế "wikilink")'s Đồng Khánh Girl's High School, which opened in
1917, was widely praised for the ao dai uniform worn by its
students.[21] The first modernized ao dai appeared at a Paris fashion
show in 1921. In 1930, Hanoi artist Cát Tường, also known as Le Mur,
designed a dress inspired by the *áo ngũ thân* and by Paris fashions. It
reached to the floor and fit the curves of the body by using darts and a
nipped-in waist. When fabric became inexpensive, the rationale for
multiple layers and thick flaps disappeared. Modern textile manufacture
allows for wider panels, eliminating the need to sew narrow panels
together. The *áo dài Le Mur*, or "trendy" ao dai, created a sensation
when model Nguyễn Thị Hậu wore it for a feature published by the
newspaper *Today* in January 1935.[22] The style was promoted by the
artists of Tự Lực văn đoàn ("Self-Reliant Literary Group") as a national
costume for the modern era.[23] The painter Lê Phô introduced several
popular styles of ao dai beginning in 1934. Such Westernized garments
temporarily disappeared during World War II (1939–45).

In the 1950s, Saigon designers tightened the fit of the ao dai to create
the version commonly seen today.[24] Trần Kim of Thiết Lập Tailors and
Dũng of Dũng Tailors created a dress with [raglan
sleeves](raglan_sleeve "wikilink") and a diagonal seam that runs from
the collar to the underarm.[25] [Madame Nhu](Madame_Nhu "wikilink"),
first lady of South Vietnam, popularized a collarless version beginning
in 1958. The ao dai was most popular from 1960 to 1975.[26] A brightly
colored *áo dài hippy* was introduced in 1968.[27] The *áo dài mini*, a
version designed for practical use and convenience, had slits that
extended above the waist and panels that reached only to the knee.

#### Communist period

The ao dai has always been more common in the South than in the North.
The communists, who gained power in the North in 1954 and in the South
in 1975, had conflicted feelings about the ao dai. They praised it as a
national costume and one was worn to the [Paris Peace
Conference](Paris_Peace_Accords "wikilink") (1969–73) by
[Vietcong](Vietcong "wikilink") negotiator [Nguyễn Thị
Bình](Nguyễn_Thị_Bình "wikilink").[28] Yet Westernized versions of the
dress and those associated with "decadent" Saigon of the 1960s and early
1970s were condemned. Economic crisis, famine, and war with Cambodia
combined to make the 1980s a fashion low point.[29] The ao dai was
rarely worn except at weddings and other formal occasions, with the
older, looser-fitting style preferred. Overseas Vietnamese, meanwhile,
kept tradition alive with "Miss Ao Dai" pageants (*Hoa Hậu Áo Dài*), the
most notable one held annually in [Long Beach,
California](Long_Beach,_California "wikilink").[30]

The ao dai experienced a revival beginning in late 1980s, when state
enterprise and schools began adopting the dress as a uniform again.[31]
In 1989, 16,000 Vietnamese attended a Miss Ao Dai Beauty Contest held in
Ho Chi Minh City.[32] When the Miss International Pageant in Tokyo gave
its "Best National Costume" award to an ao dai-clad Trường Quỳnh Mai in
1995, *Thời Trang Trẻ* (New Fashion Magazine) claimed that Vietnam's
"national soul" was "once again honored". An "ao dai craze" followed
that lasted for several years and led to wider use of the dress as a
school uniform.

## Present day

<img src="Marie_Antoinette_Boullard-Devé_miền_trung.jpg" title="fig:Marie_Antoinette_Boullard-Devé_miền_trung.jpg" width="500" alt="Marie_Antoinette_Boullard-Devé_miền_trung.jpg" />
No longer deemed politically controversial, ao dai fashion design is
supported by the Vietnamese government.[33] It is often called *áo dài
Việt Nam* to link it to patriotic feelings. Designer Le Si Hoang is a
celebrity in Vietnam and his shop in Saigon is the place to visit for
those who admire the dress.[34] In Hanoi, tourists get fitted with ao
dai on Luong Van Can Street.[35] The elegant city of
[Huế](Huế "wikilink") in the central region is known for its ao dai,
*nón lá* (traditional leaf hats), and well-dressed women.

The ao dai is now a standard for weddings, for celebrating Tết and for
other formal occasions. It's the required uniform for female teachers
(mostly from high school to below) and female students in common high
schools in the South; there is no requirement for color or pattern for
teachers while students use plain white with some small patterns like
flowers for [school uniform](school_uniform "wikilink"). Companies often
require their female staff to wear uniforms that include the ao dai, so
[flight attendants](flight_attendant "wikilink"),
[receptionists](receptionist "wikilink"), bank female staff, restaurant
staff, and hotel workers in Vietnam may be seen wearing it.

The most popular style of ao dai fits tightly around the wearer's upper
[torso](torso "wikilink"), emphasizing her bust and curves. Although the
dress covers the entire body, it is thought to be provocative,
especially when it is made of thin fabric. "The ao dai covers
everything, but hides nothing", according to one saying.[36] The dress
must be individually fitted and usually requires several weeks for a
tailor to complete. An ao dai costs about $200 in the United States and
about $40 in Vietnam.[37]

"Symbolically, the ao dai invokes nostalgia and timelessness associated
with a gendered image of the homeland for which many Vietnamese people
throughout the diaspora yearn," wrote Nhi T. Lieu, an assistant
professor at the University of Texas at Austin.[38] The difficulties of
working while wearing an ao dai link the dress to frailty and innocence,
she wrote.[39] Vietnamese writers who favor the use of the ao dai as a
school uniform cite the inconvenience of wearing it as an advantage, a
way of teaching students feminine behavior such as modesty, caution, and
a refined manner.

The ao dai is featured in an array of Vietnam-themed or related movies.
In *[Good Morning, Vietnam](Good_Morning,_Vietnam "wikilink")* (1987),
[Robin Williams](Robin_Williams "wikilink")'s character is wowed by ao
dai-clad women when he first arrives in Saigon. The 1992 films
*[Indochine](Indochine_(film) "wikilink")* and *[The
Lover](The_Lover_(1992_film) "wikilink")* inspired several international
fashion houses to design ao dai collections,[40] including
[Prada](Prada "wikilink")'s SS08 collection and a [Georgio
Armani](Georgio_Armani "wikilink") collection. In the [Vietnamese
film](Cinema_of_Vietnam "wikilink") *[The White Silk
Dress](The_White_Silk_Dress "wikilink")* (2007), an ao dai is the sole
legacy that the mother of a poverty-stricken family has to pass on to
her daughters.[41] The Hanoi City Complex, a 65-story building now under
construction, will have an ao dai-inspired design.[42] Vietnamese
designers created ao dai for the contestants in the [Miss
Universe](Miss_Universe "wikilink") beauty contest, which was held July
2008 in [Nha Trang](Nha_Trang "wikilink"), Vietnam.[43]

The most prominent annual Ao Dai Festival outside of Vietnam is held
each year in San Jose, California, a city that is home to a large
Vietnamese American community.[44] This event features an international
array of designer ao dai under the direction of festival founder, Jenny
Do.

## The modern ao dai

![](Ao-dai-xu-Hue-2.jpg "fig:Ao-dai-xu-Hue-2.jpg") Fast pace of life in
Vietnam during the decades of integration and development witnesses the
changes in the traditional ao dai. This does not mean that the
traditional ao dai is disappearing from Vietnamese life. Yet, it is
becoming more adaptable to these modern days.

The growing of the country day by day requires the changing and the
ability of adapting. The traditional ao dai is not the exception. It is
not because the design of the ao dai does not fit to the aesthetic point
of view of modern Vietnamese. Actually, because the traditional ao dai
is inconvenient in daily life, it must be “modernized”. Indeed, the
design of the ao dai is no longer suitable for working or travelling on
transportation. Moreover, the extreme weather in Viet Nam makes citizens
uncomfortable when wearing the ao dai. Besides, it is wardrobe
malfunction that causes to the fear of wearing the ao dai in daily
activities. Thus, people change the ao dai in its designs and materials
so that wearers find it more comfortable and convenient.[45]

The modern ao dai turned up several years ago. However, the ao dai was a
concern of people who need to wear it as a uniform such as: teacher,
flight attendance, receptionists. It was not until the end of the year
2016 did the modern ao dai become so popular with hundreds of new
designs. It is modified in the collar, the sleeves or the length of two
flaps. Furthermore, instead of wearing pants with the ao dai, people
nowadays prefer to wear [culottes](culottes "wikilink") and skirts
inside it. Not only the change in designs, people also use different
materials for the modern ao dai like [silk](silk "wikilink"), brocade
fabric or voile fabric.[46]

Along with the wave of the modern ao dai, there is criticism about these
transformation. People who want to reserve traditional value in the ao
dai argue that the modern ao dai is miscellaneous. Mr. Duc Hung,
Vietnamese famous designer, also raised his opinion about this issue: “I
do assert that it is not the ao dai of Viet Nam. If we continue to
advocate the trend of the modern ao dai, the traditional ao dai will be
buried in oblivion…”.[47] In spite of this, there are still a lot of
favor from Vietnamese youngsters to the modern ao dai.

## Gallery

[File:Áo](File:Áo) dài (26282428400).jpg\|alt=Printed Ao dai in front,
Western outfit in the background.\|Printed Ao dai in front, Western
outfit in the background. [File:Áo](File:Áo) dài (30692838920).jpg\|Pink
Ao dai [File:Áo](File:Áo) dài (31387189530).jpg\|Red Ao dai
[File:Áo](File:Áo) dài (33645199761).jpg\|Blue Ao dai [File:Áo](File:Áo)
dài (6405924827).jpg\|White Ao dai [File:Áo](File:Áo) dài, Hồ Gươm
2.jpg\|: Young woman in a white áo dài. <File:Aodai> in
Purple.JPG\|Dancing high school students <File:Aodai-nonla-crop.jpg%7CA>
schoolgirl in a white ao dai and a *[nón lá](nón_lá "wikilink")* (leaf
hat). This ensemble is associated with the central city of
[Huế](Huế "wikilink") <File:Ao> dai.jpg\|A light blueish ao dai
<File:AodaiVN> SGU.JPG\|Vietnamese students, Saigon University
[File:Áo](File:Áo) dài hồ Gươm.jpg\|Young girls in ao dai by the Hoan
Kiem Lake. <File:Bicycle> of Ho Chi Minh City.jpg\|Two highschool girls
in áo dài in HCMC

## See also

-   [Áo giao lĩnh](Áo_giao_lĩnh "wikilink")
-   [Áo tứ thân](Áo_tứ_thân "wikilink")
-   [Culture of Vietnam](Culture_of_Vietnam "wikilink")
-   [Vietnamese clothing](Vietnamese_clothing "wikilink")
-   [Women in Vietnam](Women_in_Vietnam "wikilink")

## Notes

## References

Citations

## External links

-   [History of the Vietnamese Long
    Dress](https://web.archive.org/web/20130322182508/http://wrile.com/long-dress-ao-dai-vietnam)
-   [The Evolution of the Ao Dai Through Many
    Eras](https://web.archive.org/web/20110622101508/http://www.ci.seattle.wa.us/helpinglink/StudentWeb/webproject/html/fashion.htm),
    Gia Long Alumni Association of Seattle, 2000
-   [Vietnam: Mini-Skirts &
    Ao-Dais](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ej7WATu_klE). A video that
    shows what the women of Saigon wore in 1968

[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:History of
Asian clothing](Category:History_of_Asian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Folk costumes](Category:Folk_costumes "wikilink")
[Category:Vietnamese clothing](Category:Vietnamese_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Vietnamese words and
phrases](Category:Vietnamese_words_and_phrases "wikilink")

[1] *Áo* is derived from a [Middle Chinese](Middle_Chinese "wikilink")
word meaning "padded coat". "[ao
dai](http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/ao-dai)",
*definition of ao dai in Oxford dictionary (British & World English)*.
Retrieved November 3, 2014.

[2] Phan Van Giuong, *Tuttle Compact Vietnamese Dictionary:
Vietnamese-English English-Vietnamese* (2008), p. 76. "**dài** *adj.*
long, lengthy."