---
title: Backless dress
permalink: /Backless_dress/
---

[right\|thumb\|upright\|Backless dress,
2012](/File:Rachael_Berlie_(7220970388).jpg "wikilink") A **backless
dress** is a style of women’s clothing designed to expose the wearer's
[back](/human_back "wikilink"). The back may be either partially exposed
with a low cut or fully exposed with the use of strings. A backless
[dress](/dress "wikilink") is most commonly worn on formal occasions or
as [evening wear](/evening_gown "wikilink") or as [wedding
dresses](/wedding_dress "wikilink") and can be of any length, from a
[miniskirt](/miniskirt "wikilink")-length to floor-length. Other
backless styles include backless [swimsuits](/swimsuit "wikilink") and
[tops](/top_(clothing) "wikilink"), such as a
[haltertop](/haltertop "wikilink").

## Evolution

[thumb\|upright\|left\|Early backless dress worn by [Clara
Bow](Clara_Bow "wikilink"),
mid-1920s](/File:Clara_Bow_portrait.JPG "wikilink") Backless dresses
first appeared in the 1920s.[1] In the 1930s, the style became
associated with the [sun tanning](/sun_tanning "wikilink") fashions of
the time, and the backless dress was a way of showing off a tan, usually
without tan lines. The wearer usually had to be slim to be able to pull
off the effect.[2] In December 1937, the actress [Micheline
Patton](/Micheline_Patton "wikilink") was controversially filmed from
behind while wearing a backless dress in the final episode of the early
[BBC](/BBC "wikilink") fashion documentary
*[Clothes-Line](/Clothes-Line "wikilink")*.[3] The illusion of nudity
led to outraged viewers writing in to complain, and [Pearl
Binder](/Pearl_Binder "wikilink"), who co-presented the show, quipped,
"Grandmamma looks back but Micheline has no back to be seen."[4]

## Styles

[right\|thumb\|upright\|A Latin dancer in a dress with low-cut
back](/File:Tanzturnier_28.JPG "wikilink") A backless dress can be held
up in a number of ways. The most common is by a single piece of cloth or
strap which passes behind the wearer's [neck](/neck "wikilink"),
[halterneck](/halterneck "wikilink")-style.[5] The neck strap can itself
be covered by the wearer's [hair](/hair "wikilink"), leaving the
impression from behind that nothing is holding the dress up.
Alternatively, the dress may be held up by short sleeves or by a single
or two [spaghetti straps](/spaghetti_strap "wikilink"), which hold the
dress up at the [shoulders](/shoulder "wikilink"). A stick-on dress or
[nude netting](/nude_netting "wikilink") are other ways that a dress can
be held up.[6]

The amount of the back exposed by a backless dress can also vary, with
some styles leaving the upper or upper and middle back uncovered, and
exposing the [shoulder blades](/shoulder_blades "wikilink").[7] Some
backless dresses plunge nearly to the buttocks and some start from the
armhole depth, usually with a zipper opening and some sport a halter
neck.[8]

[thumb\|upright\|left\|Backless
choli](/File:Alecia_Raut_choli_crop.jpg "wikilink")

### Choli

The backless style is also found in the [choli](/choli "wikilink"), the
blouse worn by [Indian](/Indian_people "wikilink") women along with
[saris](/sari "wikilink") and [ghagras](/ghagra "wikilink").

The back is either "partially exposed" with a low cut or "fully exposed"
by use of strings.[9] The backless styles were created mainly due to the
influence of Western fashion.[10] It was made popular by [Madhuri
Dixit](/Madhuri_Dixit "wikilink") when she wore it and appeared in the
*Dhak Dhak* song.[11] "The drape and the blouse make the saree a sexy
ensemble, and my blouses are always low back because I love the peep of
the skin against so much fabric." — Indian actress [Vidya
Balan](/Vidya_Balan "wikilink")[12]

## Breast support

Breast support may be an issue for many women when wearing a backless
dress, but nevertheless most women choosing this style of top prefer to
go braless. [Bra designs](/List_of_brassiere_designs "wikilink") are
available that offer breast support with backless dresses. Some bra
designs use convertible styles, [adhesive
bras](http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/318sRaN9CtL._SL500_AA280_.jpg),
underwire and strapless bras. Some bra designs can also be worn by women
with larger cup sizes.[13]

## See also

-   [Halterneck](/Halterneck "wikilink")

## References

[Category:20th-century
fashion](/Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](/Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](/Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Human
back](/Category:Human_back "wikilink")

[1]

[2] [1930s Fashion
History](http://www.fashion-era.com/stylish_thirties.htm)

[3] Taylor, Lou, *Establishing Dress History*, chapter 2 (Manchester
2002)

[4]

[5] Starpulse.com: [AnnaLynne McCord](/AnnaLynne_McCord "wikilink")
[wearing a backless
dress](http://www.starpulse.com/news/media/AnnaLynne-McCord-backless-1.jpg)

[6] [Olivia Wilde](/Olivia_Wilde "wikilink") used nude netting dress at
the Emmy Awards: [Front
view](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_EZHn9YzGKL0/Srf2XYbIrOI/AAAAAAAAAfY/OBDyEnxxToo/s320/olivia-wilde-emmy-awards-2009.jpg)
and [back
view](http://www.stylebyme.net/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/olivia_wilde_arri3.jpg)

[7] [Pink backless draped
dress](http://www.kennaugh.com/Pink_backless_draped_dress_2.jpg)

[8] [backless dress](http://sewguide.com/sew-backless-halter-neck-gown/)

[9]

[10] \-

[11]

[12]

[13] [Elan Image Consulting: A Great Bra for 'Busty'
Women](http://elanimagemanagement.com/html/elan-blog/?p=119)
- ["Breakthrough Backless
Bra"](http://elanimagemanagement.com/html/elan-blog/wp-content/uploads/image/FWD101_maidenform_backless_bra%281%29.jpg)