---
title: Cheongsam
permalink: /Cheongsam/
---

The **''cheongsam***(, ; from [Cantonese](/Cantonese "wikilink") ), also
known as***qipao**'' (; from [Mandarin](/Mandarin_Chinese "wikilink") ;
), is a type of feminine body-hugging dress with distinctive Chinese
features of [Manchu](/Manchu_people "wikilink") origin. It was called
**mandarin gown** during
[1920s-1930s](/Republic_of_China_(1912–1949) "wikilink"), popularised by
Chinese socialites and upper-class women in
[Shanghai](/Shanghai "wikilink").[1]

## Terminology

As English [loanwords](/loanword "wikilink"), both *qipao* and
*cheongsam* describe the same type of tight-fitting Chinese dress worn
by women, and the words could be used interchangeably.[2]

The term *cheongsam* is a [romanization](/romanization "wikilink") of
[Cantonese](/Standard_Cantonese "wikilink") word ** (), which comes from
the [Shanghainese](/Shanghainese_dialect "wikilink") term . In Cantonese
and Shanghainese, the term is used to describe the tight-fitting Chinese
dress popularized in [Shanghai](/Shanghai "wikilink"). However, in
[Mandarin Chinese](/Mandarin_Chinese "wikilink") and other [varieties of
Chinese](/varieties_of_Chinese "wikilink"), () refers to [an exclusively
male garment](/Changshan "wikilink"), and the female version is known as
the .

In [Hong Kong](/Hong_Kong "wikilink"), where many Shanghai tailors fled
after the [communist revolution of
1949](/Chinese_Revolution_(1949) "wikilink"), the word became
gender-neutral, referring to both male or female garments. The word
*qipao* () became a more formal term for the female . Usage of the term
*cheongsam* in Western countries mostly followed the original Cantonese
meaning and applies to the dress worn by women only.

## History

### Background

[200px\|thumb\|A model of the Qing-style Han Chinese dress that Han
women wore around the 19th to 20th centuries. Noticeably, the Han women
wore skirts below their Qing-style tops, which was inherited from the
Ming dynasty style
dress](/File:Chinese_embroidered_silk_lady's_jacket_and_pleated_skirt,_c._1900,_East-West_Center.JPG "wikilink")
When the [Manchus](/Manchu_people "wikilink") ruled
[China](/China "wikilink") during the [Qing
dynasty](/Qing_dynasty "wikilink"), they used an administrative division
called the [Eight Banner system](/Eight_Banner_system "wikilink").
Originally only the Manchu households were organised within this system,
but over time [Mongols](/Mongol "wikilink") and [Han
Chinese](/Han_Chinese "wikilink") were incorporated. The Manchus, and
anyone living under the Eight Banners system, wore different clothing
from ordinary civilians. Thus they became known as *Banner People*
([旗人](/wikt:旗人 "wikilink") [pinyin](/pinyin "wikilink"): ). The
Manchu clothing that they wore consisted of similar long robes for both
men and women. These were called ([長袍](/wikt:长袍 "wikilink")).

For a period of time, under the dynastic laws after 1636, all Han
Chinese were forced under penalty of death to adopt the Manchu male
hairstyle, the [queue](/Queue_(hairstyle) "wikilink"), and dress in
Manchu *changpao* instead of traditional [Han Chinese
clothing](/Han_Chinese_clothing "wikilink") (剃发易服). However, the
order for ordinary non-Banner Han civilians to wear Manchu clothing was
lifted, and only those Han who served as officials or scholars were
required to wear them. Over time though, some Han civilian men
voluntarily adopted [changshans](/changshan "wikilink"). By the late
Qing, not only officials and scholars, but a great many commoner Han men
wore Manchu male attire.[3][4] Until 1911, the Manchu *changpao* was
required clothing for Chinese men of a certain class.

For women, Manchu and Han systems of clothing coexisted.[5] Throughout
the Qing dynasty, Han civilian women continued to wear traditional Han
clothing from the Ming dynasty.[6] As a result, Ming dynasty style
clothing was retained in some places in China until the [Xinhai
Revolution](/Xinhai_Revolution "wikilink") of 1911.[7]

### Birth of Qipao

[200px\|thumb\|Chinese singer and actress [Zhou
Xuan](Zhou_Xuan "wikilink") wearing a cheongsam in 1930s in
Shanghai](/File:Zhou_Xuan_by_C.H.Wong_Photo_Studio.jpg "wikilink") The
original *qipao* fitted loosely and hung in an A-line.[8] It covered
most of the wearer's body, revealing only the head, hands, and the tips
of the toes. The baggy clothing also served to conceal the figure of the
wearer regardless of age.

The version seen as the typical *qipao* in China today was popularized
by the celebrities, socialites and politicians of the time in
[Shanghai](/Shanghai "wikilink") from the 1920s to the 1940s. Former
[First Lady of China](/First_Lady_of_the_Republic_of_China "wikilink")
[Madame Wellington Koo](/Oei_Hui-lan "wikilink") was a prominent figure
among them.[9][10] Voted several times by
[Vogue](/Vogue_(magazine) "wikilink") into its lists of the world's
best-dressed women, Madame Wellington Koo was much admired for her
adaptations of the traditional Manchu fashion, which she wore with lace
trousers and jade necklaces.[11][12] Cheongsam dresses at the time had
been decorously slit a few inches up the sides, but Madame Koo slashed
hers to the knee, 'with lace pantelettes just visible to the ankle'.[13]
Unlike other Asian socialites, Madame Koo also insisted on local Chinese
silks, which she thought were of superior quality.[14][15]

### Further transformation

[right\|thumb\|200px\|Two women wearing cheongsam and high-heel shoes in
a 1930s Shanghai advertisement](/Image:Qipao1.jpg "wikilink") People
eagerly sought a more modernized style of dress and transformed the old
qipao to suit new tastes. Slender and tight-fitting with a high cut, it
had great differences from the traditional qipao. High-class
[courtesans](/courtesan "wikilink") and celebrities in the city made
these redesigned tight fitting qipao popular at that time.[16] In
[Shanghainese](/Shanghainese "wikilink"), it was first known as for
'long dress', rendered in Mandarin as and in Cantonese as ; it is the
last of these spoken renditions of that was borrowed into English as
"cheongsam".

Like the male *Changpao*, Cheongsam/qipao in the beginning were always
worn with trousers. In 1930s, with the introduction of Western fashion
during the [Nanjing decade](/Nanjing_decade "wikilink"), many people
replaced trousers with [stockings](/stocking "wikilink"). The side slits
were re-purposed into aesthetic design reaching top of thigh to reflect
new fashion trend. By the 1940s, trousers had completely fallen out of
use, replaced by different type of [hosiery](/hosiery "wikilink").
[High-heeled shoes](/High-heeled_shoe "wikilink") were another fashion
trend introduced to Shanghai at the same time, and it became an
essential part of qipao fashion set, which continued into modern
days.[17] As trend of hosiery in turn declined in later decades, women
started to wear qipao more commonly with bare legs. While this
development settled the cheongsam as a one-piece dress, by contrast, the
related Vietnamese retained trousers.

The modernized version of qipao is noted for accentuating the figures of
women, and as such was popular as a dress for high society. As Western
fashions evolved, so does the cheongsam design, with introduction of
high-necked sleeveless dresses, bell-like sleeves, and the black lace
frothing at the hem of a ball gown. By the 1940s, cheongsam came in a
wide variety of fabrics with an equal variety of accessories.

The 1949 [Communist Revolution](/Chinese_Civil_War "wikilink") curtailed
the popularity of the cheongsam and other fashions in Shanghai, but the
Shanghainese emigrants and refugees brought the fashion to Hong Kong and
Taiwan where it has remained popular. Recently there has been a revival
of the Shanghainese cheongsam in Shanghai and elsewhere in [Mainland
China](/Mainland_China "wikilink"); the Shanghainese style functions now
mostly as a stylish [party dress](/Cocktail_dress "wikilink").

### Popularity and women's liberation

The Republican period is the golden age of Cheongsam. In exploring
reasons behind its prevalence in [Republic of
China](/Republic_of_China_(1912–1949) "wikilink"), many scholars relate
it to the women’s liberation movements. After the feudal Qing dynasty
was overturned, Chinese feminists called for women's liberation from
traditional roles and they led several movements against the
Neo-Confucian gender segregation, including a termination of bound feet
for women, cutting off long hair which was conventionally symbolized as
women's oriental beauty, and encouraging women to wear men's one-piece
clothing, [Changshan](/Changshan "wikilink") or "changpao".

"Changpao" was traditionally taken as men's patent throughout the long
history since Han Dynasty (202 BC to 220) to Qing Dynasty (1616–1911).
During that time, Chinese Han female's clothing gradually developed into
two pieces. Women were forbidden to wear robes as men did and instead
had to wear tops and bottoms known as "Liang jie yi". After the [Xinhai
Revolution of 1911](/Xinhai_Revolution "wikilink") (which overthrew the
Qing dynasty), young Chinese people began to learn western science and
cultures in order to seek a way of saving the nation. Also, the opening
of several ports and ceding territories of China to western powers
imported western civilization abundantly to mainland China. Among all
these western thoughts, the idea of gender equality quickly gained its
followers, among whom young female students became its prime
advocates.[18]

In the early years of Republican period, wearing Cheongsam carried the
symbol of promoting gender equality and saving the country. The color of
Cheongsam were usually cold and rigid. It symbolized a silent protest,
as part of the [May Fourth Movement](/May_Fourth_Movement "wikilink")
and the [New Cultural Movement](/New_Cultural_Movement "wikilink").

Since 1930s, Cheongsam was popularized from young female students to all
women in China regardless of their ages and social status. More and more
female workers and celebrities put on Cheongsam. The style of Cheongsam
also varied due to western influence. It changed from a wide and loose
style to a more form fitting and revealing cut, which put more emphasis
on women’s body line. The length of Cheongsam was also reduced from
ankle reaching to above the knee.

The design of Cheongsam got various inventions like ruffled collar,
bell-like sleeves and black lace frothing. Starting from that, the
priority of Cheongsam moved from a political expression to aesthetic and
ornamental emphasis.

## Timeline of Chinese dress

[thumb\| [Pu Yi](Pu_Yi "wikilink")（the last emperor of China）and his
wife [Empress
Wanrong](/Empress_Wanrong "wikilink")](/File:溥仪和婉容.jpg "wikilink")
Starting from the Qing Dynasty, changpao, which was the early form of
cheongsam, was the daily clothes of Manchus Bannerman. Apart from
cheongsam, changpao was a long robe without sleeves and collars.[19]

Until the 1920s, right after the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty and
founding of the Republic of China, cheongsam was originated in Shanghai.
Cheongsam of the early 1920s had loose cutting, with long, wide sleeves.
Affected by western culture, cheongsam kept on changing, such as
becoming more fitted and body-hugging, with side slits that reached up
to the thigh.[20] [21]Moreover, numerous distinct designs were unveiled
and cheongsam became a fashion trend.[22]

In 1929, Cheongsam was chosen by the Republic of China to be one of the
national dresses. In the 1930s, the fashion prevailed in Shanghai. At
that time, Cheongsam was made of silk and embroidered with pearls and
other decorations. Also, they were close fitting, and drew the outline
of the wearer's body.

In 1940s, Cheongsam was worn with [stockings](/stocking "wikilink"), and
trousers had completely fallen out of use. [High-heeled
shoes](/High-heeled_shoe "wikilink") became an essential part of qipao
fashion set.[23]

From the 1950s to the 1970s, due to the anti-tradition movements in
China, especially the [Chinese Cultural
Revolution](/Chinese_Cultural_Revolution "wikilink") (1966–1976), the
Cheongsam was seen as a feudal dress of the ancient times. It was
abandoned as daily clothing, and people who wore Cheongsams were judged
as being bourgeois, which was considered a political misbehavior at that
time. For example, in 1963, when President Liu Shaoqi visited four
neighboring countries in South Asia, first lady Wang Guangmei wore a
Cheongsam. She was later declared guilty in the Cultural Revolution for
wearing a Cheongsam.

Since 1980s, with the trend of reevaluation of Chinese traditional
culture, people in mainland China started to pay attention to the
Cheongsam again. The Cheongsam is gaining popularity in films, beauty
pageants, and fashion shows in both China and other countries all over
the world. In 1984, the Cheongsam was specified as the formal attire of
female diplomatic agents by the People's Republic of China.

[File:孝慎成皇后.jpg](File:孝慎成皇后.jpg)\|

<center>

**Daoguang Period**
(1821–1850)
*[Empress Xiaoshen](/Empress_Xiaoshen "wikilink")*

</center>

[File:《喜溢秋庭图》静贵妃部分.jpg](File:《喜溢秋庭图》静贵妃部分.jpg)\|

<center>

**Daoguang Period**
(1821–1850)
*[Empress Xiaojingcheng](/Empress_Xiaojingcheng "wikilink")*

</center>

[File:毓朗贝勒福晋.jpg](File:毓朗贝勒福晋.jpg)\|

<center>

**Guangxu Period**
(1875–1908)
*Lady Heseri*

</center>

[File:爱新觉罗·恒香.jpg](File:爱新觉罗·恒香.jpg)\|

<center>

**Guangxu Period**
(1875–1908)
*Lady Aixingioro Hengxiang*

</center>

<File:Tan> Yulin.jpg\|

<center>

**Republican Period**
(1913–1949)
*[Noble Consort Mingxian](/Noble_Consort_Mingxian "wikilink")*

</center>

## Modern use

### Workplace

Some airlines in Mainland China and Taiwan, such as [China
Airlines](/China_Airlines "wikilink"), [China Eastern
Airlines](/China_Eastern_Airlines "wikilink"), [Hainan
Airlines](/Hainan_Airlines "wikilink"), and [Xiamen
Airlines](/Xiamen_Airlines "wikilink"), have cheongsam uniforms for
their women flight attendants and ground workers. These uniform
cheongsams are in a plain color, hemmed just above the knee, with a
close-fitting wool suit jacket of the same color as the cheongsam.

In the 1950s, [women in the
workforce](/women_in_the_workforce "wikilink") in Hong Kong started to
wear more functional cheongsam made of wool, twill, and other materials.
Most were tailor fitted and often came with a matching jacket. The
dresses were a fusion of Chinese tradition with modern styles. Cheongsam
were commonly replaced by more comfortable clothing such as sweaters,
jeans, business suits and skirts. Due to its restrictive nature, it is
now mainly worn as [formal wear](/formal_wear "wikilink") for important
occasions. They are sometimes worn by politicians and film artists in
Taiwan and Hong Kong. They are shown in some Chinese movies such as in
the 1960s film *[The World of Suzie
Wong](/The_World_of_Suzie_Wong_(film) "wikilink")*, where actress [Nancy
Kwan](/Nancy_Kwan "wikilink") made the cheongsam briefly fashionable in
western culture. However, they are sometimes used as
[Halloween](/Halloween "wikilink") costumes in some Western countries.
They are also commonly seen in beauty contests, along with [swim
suits](/swim_suits "wikilink"). Today, cheongsam are only commonly worn
day to day as a uniform by people like restaurant hostesses and serving
staff at luxury hotels.

### School uniform

A few primary schools and some secondary schools in Hong Kong,
especially older schools established by Christian missionaries, use a
plain rimmed sky-blue cotton and/or dark blue velvet (for winter)
cheongsam with the metal school badge right under the stand-up collar to
be closed with a metal hook and eye as the official uniform for their
female students. The schools which use this standard include [True Light
Girls' College](/True_Light_Girls'_College "wikilink"), [St. Paul's
Co-educational College](/St._Paul's_Co-educational_College "wikilink"),
[Heep Yunn School](/Heep_Yunn_School "wikilink"), [St. Stephen's Girls'
College](/St._Stephen's_Girls'_College "wikilink"), [Ying Wa Girls'
School](/Ying_Wa_Girls'_School "wikilink"), etc. These cheongsam are
usually straight, with no waist shaping, and the cheongsam hem must
reach mid-thigh. The cheongsam fit closely to the neck, and the stiff
collar is hooked closed, despite the tropical humid and hot weather.
Although the skirts have short slits, they are too narrow to allow
students to walk in long strides. The seams above the slits often split
when walking and are repeatedly sewn. Many schools also require
underskirts to be worn with the cheongsam. The underskirt is a white
cotton full slip, hemmed slightly shorter than the cheongsam, and have
slits at the sides like the cheongsam, although the slits are deeper. A
white cotton undershirt is often worn underneath the cheongsam. The
cheongsam's length, styling, color and sleeve length varies between
schools. Many students feel it an ordeal, yet it is a visible
manifestation of the strict discipline that is the hallmark of
prestigious secondary schools in Hong Kong and many students and their
parents like that. In summer wearing this for a school day would be
sweaty and unhygienic. Some rebellious students express their
dissatisfaction with this tradition by wearing their uniform with the
stand-up collar intentionally left unhooked or hemmed above their knees.
The Ying Wa and True Light Schools have sent questionnaires to their
students about uniform reforms but have not altered their policies.[24]
However, Madam Lau Kam Lung Secondary School of Miu Fat Buddhist
Monastery ended their cheongsam uniform in 1990 after receiving
suggestions from its student union.[25]

### Lolita fashion

Some [Lolita](/Lolita_fashion "wikilink") dresses are styled like a
cheongsam. The dresses or jumper skirts are designed after traditional
Chinese dresses. This style of Lolita fashion is called *Qi Lolita*.[26]

### Weddings

In Western [weddings](/wedding "wikilink"), Chinese brides or brides
marrying into a Chinese family, will often wear cheongsam for a portion
of the wedding day. It is common for many brides to have both a
traditional white [wedding dress](/wedding_dress "wikilink") and a
cheongsam that they wear during the [tea
ceremony](/tea_ceremony "wikilink"). Cheongsam styles have also evolved
to be more modern from mermaid silhouettes to semi-traditional styles
that feature a cheongsam top with softer details like lace and a looser
skirt.[27]

<File:Aminah> Cendrakasih in cheongsam by Tati Photo Studios, Jakarta
(c1959).jpg\|

<center>

Indonesian actress Aminah Cendrakasih in cheongsam

</center>

<File:Red> qipao.jpg\|

<center>

Typical modern Qipao with high-slit cuts reaching top of the thigh

</center>

<File:Chinese> Cheong-sam of Xi.jpg\|

<center>

Typical modern Qipao in short style above the knee

</center>

<File:20160915-DSC> 8145 (29116412094).jpg\|

<center>

Modern Qipao [mini dress](/mini_dress "wikilink")

</center>

## On the international stage

### Sport-related

In the [2008 Summer Olympics](/2008_Summer_Olympics "wikilink"), the
medal bearers wore cheongsam. Similar attire was worn by female members
of the Swedish team and of the Spanish team in the opening ceremony,
with the national colors.

For the [2012 Hong Kong Sevens](/2012_Hong_Kong_Sevens "wikilink")
tournament, sportswear brand [Kukri Sports](/Kukri_Sports "wikilink")
teamed up with Hong Kong lifestyle retail store
[G.O.D.](/Goods_of_Desire "wikilink") to produce merchandising, which
included traditional Chinese jackets and cheongsam-inspired ladies' polo
shirts.[28][29][30]

### Political stage

[thumb\|Cheongsam belonging to the wives of past Singaporean political
leaders on display in an exhibition entitled *In the Mood for Cheongsam:
Modernity and Singapore Women* at the [National Museum of
Singapore](National_Museum_of_Singapore "wikilink") in
2012](/File:Cheongsam_at_the_National_Museum_of_Singapore_-_20120406.jpg "wikilink")
In contemporary China, the meaning of cheongsam has been revisited
again. It now embodies an identity of being ethnic Chinese, and thus is
used for important diplomatic occasions.

Since 2013, [Peng Liyuan](/Peng_Liyuan "wikilink"), the first lady of
China, has worn cheongsam several times while on foreign visits with
Chinese president Xi Jinping.

In November 2014, cheongsam was the official attire for the political
leaders' wives in the 22nd APEC meeting in Beijing.

### International fashion

With the growth of the Chinese economy, cheongsam has experienced a
renewed popularity. Many Western designers have integrated elements of
cheongsam in their fashion collections. French designer Pierre Cardin
once said that cheongsam was his inspiration for many of his evening
dress designs.[31] In many films and movies, cheongsam is used to make a
fashion statement and an exotic impression. In the 2011 movie *[One
Day](/One_Day_(2011_film) "wikilink")*, Anne Hathaway wore a set of dark
blue cheongsam as evening dress. Many western stars such as Elizabeth
Taylor, Nicole Kidman, Paris Hilton, Emma Watson, and Celine Dion have
also made public appearances wearing cheongsam.

## Controversies on origin

Usually, people take the cheongsam as adapted from a one-piece dress of
Manchu women in the Qing dynasty. But debates on the origin of the
cheongsam have never stopped in academic circles. There are mainly three
arguments on the origins of the cheongsam: The first argument says that
the cheongsam came directly from the clothing of Banner People when the
Manchu ruled China during the Qing dynasty. This argument was
prominently represented by Zhou Xibao (周锡保) in his work--*The History
of Ancient Chinese Clothing and Ornaments*.[32]

The second opinion holds that the cheongsam inherited some features of
the *chángpáo* of Banner People in the Qing dynasty, but the true origin
of the cheongsam dates back to a period between the Western Zhou dynasty
(1046 BC-771 BC) and the pre-Qin era, approximately two millennia before
the Qing dynasty. According to Yuan Jieying (袁杰英)’s book *Chinese
Cheongsam*, the modern cheongsam shares many similarities with the
narrow-cut straight skirt that women wore in the Western Zhou
dynasty.[33] And Chinese Professor Bao Minxin (包铭新) also pointed out
in his book *A Real Record of Modern Chinese Costume* that the cheongsam
originated from the ancient robe in the Han dynasty (206 BC-220 AD). The
robe is a one-piece upper and lower connected long dress which was quite
popular among ladies in Han.[34]

The third argument was raised by Bian Xiangyang (卞向阳) in his book *An
Analysis on the Origin of Qipao*. Bian thinks that the cheongsam
originates from neither the robe nor the *chángpáo*. It is an adaption
of western-style dress during the [Republic of China
era](/Republic_of_China_(1912–49) "wikilink") when people were open to
the western cultures. In his opinion, the cheongsam was a hybrid of
traditional Chinese costumes and western costumes such as the waistcoat
and one-piece dress.[35]

## Similar garments

[Vietnamese](/Vietnamese_people "wikilink") *[Áo
Dài](/Áo_Dài "wikilink")* is thought to bear some resemblances to the
Chinese [Cheongsam](/Cheongsam "wikilink"). In the 18th century, in an
attempt to separate his domain from [Tonkin](/Tonkin "wikilink") ruled
by his rival Trịnh clan and build an independent state, lord [Nguyễn
Phúc Khoát](/Nguyễn_Phúc_Khoát "wikilink") forced his subjects to
relinquish the traditional [Áo Giao Lĩnh](/Áo_Giao_Lĩnh "wikilink"), a
type of crossed-collar robe, found across Sino culture countries, in
favor of a type of robe that has upright collar.The
[Vietnamese](/Vietnamese_people "wikilink") *[áo
dài](/áo_dài "wikilink")* actually originated from the [Áo Ngũ
Thân](/Áo_Ngũ_Thân "wikilink") , also experienced Western influences and
became what known today as [Áo Dài](/Áo_Dài "wikilink")

## See also

-   [Áo dài](/Áo_dài "wikilink")
-   [Changshan](/Changshan "wikilink")
-   [Hanfu](/Ancient_Chinese_clothing "wikilink")
-   [Mao suit](/Mao_suit "wikilink")
-   [Chinese clothing](/Chinese_clothing "wikilink")

## Notes and references

## Bibliography

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-   About a tailor of cheongsam who has been in the business for nearly
    80 years.

-

## External links

-   [About.com
    entry](http://chineseculture.about.com/library/weekly/aa011501a.htm)
    on the *qipao*
-   [Documentary on the
    *qipao*](http://english.cctv.com/program/RediscoveringChina_new/20050516/101668.shtml)
    on CCTV website

[Category:Dresses](/Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:17th-century
fashion](/Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](/Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](/Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](/Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Chinese
clothing](/Category:Chinese_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Chinese words
and phrases](/Category:Chinese_words_and_phrases "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](/Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](/Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:History of Asian
clothing](/Category:History_of_Asian_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] Twitchett, Denis; Fairbank, John K. (2008) Cambridge History of
China Volume 9 Part 1 The Ch'ing Empire to 1800, p87-88

[5]

[6] .

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16] [旗袍起源与哪个民族?](http://zhidao.baidu.com/question/14703448.html)

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24] 旗袍维系香港女校百年情. 李气虹 (The qipao keep the affections of
Hong Kong girls schools of 100 years by Li Qihong) (2003-05-16).

[25] [Madam Lau Kam Lung Secondary School of Miu Fat Buddhist
Monastery](http://www.grandpacific.com.hk/school/p91.htm)

[26] KawaCura\|date=2015-03-05\|work=KawaCura\|access-date=2017-08-01}}

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]