---
title: Cocktail dress
permalink: /Cocktail_dress/
---

A **cocktail dress** is a dress suitable at
[semi-formal](/semi-formal "wikilink") occasions, sometimes called
[cocktail parties](/cocktail_parties "wikilink"), usually in the late
afternoon, and usually with accessories.

After [World War I](/World_War_I "wikilink"), the idea of the “working
woman” became popular. After 1929, it was more common to see women in a
social context. With the help of liberation organizations, the idea of a
"modern woman" began to rise, and soon the "drinking woman" could be
seen in business settings.[1] Companies increasingly hosted [cocktail
parties](/cocktail_parties "wikilink") to have an entertaining
environment for employees and customers to mingle. These parties usually
began after 5:00 P.M.[2] Since guests are expected to walk around and
meet people, clothes made for these occasions are often functional and
comfortable. This practical and fashionable garment became a popular
uniform for progressive elite women in the 1920s.[3]

## History

### 19th century

A *dinner dress* was a [gown](/gown "wikilink") that was worn by ladies
in the [Victorian era](/Victorian_era "wikilink") for dinners and
parties at homes. It could be very elaborate, but often had long
sleeves, a high neck, or a narrow skirt to set them apart from [evening
gowns](/evening_gown "wikilink"). In the 20th century however, dinner
dresses went out of fashion and were replaced by evening gowns for
[formal dinners](/formal_dinner "wikilink").

### 20th century

During the 1920s, French coutures' clientele consisted mainly of
American department stores that reproduced French designs and promoted
French designers. This led French designers to create dresses to appeal
to American buyers.[4] Since cocktail parties originated in the United
States, French designers created their own version of a cocktail dress.
However, unlike the strict, professional cuts of American-styled
dresses, the French designed much looser and free flowing beach
pajamas,[5][6] consisting of a silk top and palazzo pants, usually
paired with a mid-calf-length wrap jacket or sheath.[7][8] These clothes
were usually worn for more exclusive and intimate gatherings. The French
style valued simplicity and elegance in their designs while
American-styles valued functionality and efficiency. American clients
wanted a single dress that could be modified to fit several times of the
day with the use of accessories.[9] The fabric of the dress and whether
it was worn with a cocktail hat differentiated a day dress from a
cocktail dress.[10] By the mid-1920s, hemlines of dresses were just
below the knee rather than ankle-length, which was more common for
[evening gowns](/evening_gown "wikilink").[11]

#### The Great Depression

To take account of the [economic crisis](/Great_Depression "wikilink"),
designers such as [Muriel King](/Muriel_King "wikilink") emphasized the
importance of accessories by designing simple dresses,[12] which also
helped the market for jewelry, hats, gloves, and sheaths. However, after
the [Wall Street Crash of 1929](/Wall_Street_Crash_of_1929 "wikilink"),
private cocktail parties became more popular than corporate gatherings
as luxurious lifestyles were no longer seen as fashionable. These elite
gatherings helped the rise of day-to-evening fashion.[13]

#### Post-World War II

[thumb\|upright=0.6\|left\|[Jody Watley](Jody_Watley "wikilink") in a
1950s black sequined cocktail dress in
1990](/File:Jw_in_vintage90.jpg "wikilink") After [World War
II](/World_War_II "wikilink"), [Dior](/Christian_Dior_SE "wikilink")
came out with the "New Look", which consisted of a tight waistline, long
hemlines, and fuller skirts. This style flattered the women silhouette
and created a romantic aura around the aesthetic.[14] Since cocktail
parties were so popular, American designers such as [Anne
Fogarty](/Anne_Fogarty "wikilink") began to create cocktail dresses that
revolved around the "New Look" using less expensive fabrics.[15] French
designers, such as Dior and [Jacques Fath](/Jacques_Fath "wikilink"),
saw the high market for cocktail dresses and began to design dresses for
American department stores.[16]

With the increasing feasibility and popularity of air travel, French
cocktail dresses became popular globally.[17] As French women traveled
to wealthy resort cities, the designs of their cocktail dresses spread
among the American elite. While French couture relied on travel and
American department stores, American designers relied on fashion
magazines, such as [*Vogue*](/Vogue_(magazine) "wikilink") and [*Vanity
Fair*](/Vanity_Fair_(magazine) "wikilink"), and the need to dress
semi-formally for cocktail hour.[18]

In 1948, [Christian Dior](/Christian_Dior "wikilink") labeled this
business-casual dress "cocktail dress", which allowed department stores
to advertise specifically “cocktail” garments and accessories,
increasing the growth of fashion stores.[19] The craze for cocktail
culture drove sales in cocktail merchandise as well, such as cocktail
and martini-printed fabrics.[20]

## Composition

The American cocktail dress could be anything from a "[little black
dress](/little_black_dress "wikilink")" to a floral-printed dress or a
plain, short evening gown, as long as it was worn with accessories.[21]
These might be [earrings](/earring "wikilink"), pearl
[necklaces](/necklace "wikilink"), [bracelets](/bracelet "wikilink"), or
[brooches](/brooch "wikilink") (stylish in the 1950s).[22] However, it
was most common to wear [costume
jewelry](/costume_jewelry "wikilink").[23] Although they were
inexpensive, wearing large amounts was seen as daring and luxurious,
especially when wearing a modest dress.[24] In addition, the jewelry
would be worn along with hats: [velvet](/velvet "wikilink"),
[lace](/lace "wikilink"), or [horsehair](/horsehair "wikilink"); little
[turbans](/turban "wikilink") or close-fitting caps of
[brocade](/brocade "wikilink"), [taffeta](/taffeta "wikilink"), or
[satin](/satin "wikilink").[25] [Gloves](/Glove "wikilink") needed to be
fashionably up-to-date and could be any length, material, or color.[26]
Shoes were usually [high heels](/High-heeled_footwear "wikilink"), but
evening satin sandals were also common and could be dyed to match the
color of the dress.[27]

## Etiquette

As cocktail parties became more high-end, the attire became subject to
stricter guidelines, which allowed people to easily differentiate
between the different identities at the party, the organizer, hostess,
and wife.[28] There were strict rules of etiquette as women needed to
wear gloves, hostesses were not allowed to wear accessories, and guests
were required to wear cocktail hats, but never indoors.[29]

## See also

-   [Party dress](/Party_dress "wikilink")

## References

[Category:20th-century
fashion](/Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](/Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](/Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:History of
fashion](/Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink") [Category:19th-century
fashion](/Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Dinner](/Category:Dinner "wikilink")
[Category:Parties](/Category:Parties "wikilink") [Category:Eating
parties](/Category:Eating_parties "wikilink") [Category:Drinking
culture](/Category:Drinking_culture "wikilink")

[1]

[2] Chaney, Lillian Hunt, and Jeanette St. Clair Martin. The essential
guide to business etiquette. Praeger, 2007.

[3] Da Cruz, Elyssa Schram. "Cocktail Dress." The Berg Companion to
Fashion. Ed. Valerie Steele. Oxford: Bloomsbury Academic, 2010.
Bloomsbury Fashion Central. Web. 09 Nov. 2017.
\<<https://www.bloomsburyfashioncentral.com/products/berg-fashion-library/encyclopedia/the-berg-companion-to-fashion/cocktail-dress>\>.

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] “Les Pyjamas et les robes du studio.” Vogue Paris (June 1930): 47.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19] Dirix, Emmanuelle. Dressing the Decades: Twentieth-Century Vintage
Style. Yale, 2016.

[20]

[21]

[22] Milbank, Caroline Rennolds. New York fashion: the evolution of
American style. Abrams, 1996.

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]