---
title: Contemporary Western wedding dress
permalink: /Contemporary_Western_wedding_dress/
---

[thumb\|right\|upright\|A bride in a contemporary version of the
traditional long white wedding dress with train, tiara and white
veil.](/File:White-wedding-dress.jpg "wikilink")

A **contemporary Western wedding dress** follows popular fashions in
Western wedding gown selection from the year 2000 on. Dresses are
usually white or ivory, and follow a pattern for popular silhouettes,
necklines, and gown lengths. Modern bridal fashion is also characterised
by specific styles of [headpieces](/headpieces "wikilink"),
[lingerie](/lingerie "wikilink"), [veils](/veil "wikilink"), and [high
heels](/high_heels "wikilink").

## Silhouettes

Some of the most popular contemporary silhouettes include: A-line,
above-the-knee, column, empire, meringue/bouffant, mermaid, princess,
and trumpet.[1]

A-line
A dress or skirt silhouette that is narrower at the top, flaring gently
wider toward the bottom thereby resembling the letter A. Works well on
most figure types; good for disguising bottom-heavy figures.[2]

Above-the-knee
Can be recognized by their tent-like silhouettes, hemmed short above the
knee.

Column
In fashion, a column, similar to a [sheath
dress](/sheath_dress "wikilink"), is a type of dress designed to tightly
fit the body. It is often made of a very light and thin material like
cotton or silk, and rarely contains any flourishes. Unlike the shorter
cocktail dress and the longer ballroom dress, a column dress typically
falls around the knees or lower thighs, and can be either strapped or
strapless.

Empire
A type of dress or top where the waist line is raised above the natural
waistline, sometimes as high as right below the bust.

Meringue/Bouffant
Characterized by a very full skirt that begins at the waist and
continues to a formal length. It has a full bodice and a cinched
waistline that falls into a full skirt.

Mermaid
The mermaid dress is close fitting through the bodice, down through the
hips and to below the knees where the skirt flares out.

Princess
Designed to hang in smooth, close-fitting, unbroken lines from shoulder
to flared hem.[3]

Trumpet
A straight skirt with a hem flounce that flares away from the body at
the hem.[4]

## Necklines

Popular contemporary necklines types include: asymmetric, bateau,
halter, jewel, off-the-shoulder, portrait, scoop, sheer, square,
strapless, sweetheart, and v-neck. The neckline refers to the shape of
the material at the top of the dress as it falls on the neck and
shoulders.

Asymmetric
Asymmetrical by its very definition means there is no symmetry or no
balance. So this neckline appears different on either side of the centre
front.

Bateau
Also known as the "Boatneck". This is a wide, high neckline that follows
the curve of the collarbone and ends in points on the shoulder seams.[5]

Halter
Necklines have a high panel on the front, which is then tied around the
neck for support and, optionally, may be tied behind the neck or include
a clasp, exposing the back and shoulders.[6]

Jewel
A plain, slightly rounded neckline without a collar.[7] Also known as
the T-shirt neckline, the jewel neckline is round and sits at the base
of the throat.

Off-the-shoulder
This neckline sits below the shoulders, with sleeve-like straps that
cover part of the upper arm. Shows off your collarbone and shoulders.

Portrait
Characterised by a wide, soft scoop from shoulder to shoulder.

Scoop
Also known as a "ballerina neckline", this U-shaped style is often cut
low, and occasionally the scoop will continue on the back of the dress.

Sheer
A neckline that is created by "sheer" or translucent fabric, such as
lace or netting, rather than an opaque material or strap.

Spaghetti strap
This neckline is nearly strapless, except for the presence of thin,
delicate straps; a bit like strings of spaghetti.

Square
The neckline is cut straight across the top in between the straps,
creating a "square"-like shape to the top of the dress.

Strapless
A neckline that can be any shape, but is discerned by its lack of straps
(neither over the shoulder, nor around the neck).

Sweetheart
A neckline with a plunge in the front in the shape of the top of a
heart.

V-neck
A neckline characterized by a plunge in the front shaped like the letter
"V".

## Gown length

Ankle
Characterized by a hemline that hits at the ankle.

Floor
Characterized by a hemline that hits the floor.

Knee
Characterized by a skirt that comes to the knee.

Mini
Characterized by a skirt that falls very high on the thigh, the shortest
option.

Short
Characterized by a skirt that falls in between the knee and high on the
thigh (length in between a mini and a knee length).

Tea
Characterized by a skirt length that falls between a knee and ankle
length, usually having a hemline at the mid-shin.

## References

[Category:2000s fashion](/Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2010s fashion](/Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](/Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Wedding
clothing](/Category:Wedding_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]