---
title: Debutante dress
permalink: /Debutante_dress/
---

[thumb\|250px\|Debutante dresses in Australia in
1952](/File:StateLibQld_1_296739_Debutantes_holding_bouquets_at_a_social_dance,_1952.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb\|250px\|American debutantes, February
2009](/File:Debutantes_having_a_dress_rehearsal,_February_2009.jpg "wikilink")

A **debutante dress** is a white [ball gown](/ball_gown "wikilink"),
accompanied by white [gloves](/gloves "wikilink") and
[pearls](/pearls "wikilink") worn by girls or young women at their
[debutante cotillion](/debutante_ball "wikilink"). Debutante cotillions
were traditional [coming of age](/coming_of_age "wikilink") celebrations
for eligible young ladies ready to be presented to society as ready for
marriage.

## Required rules of dress

A young lady's gown was regulated by a set of meticulously defined rules
which were strictly enforced. These rules varied from monarchy to
monarchy and didn't always follow the fashion of the time. White was the
preferred color for her gown, although soft colors such as ivory or
eggshell were acceptable as long as they were over a white
background.[1] The headdress always included feathers and a veil
although the number and size of the feathers varied with the time.
Married women wore a [tiara](/tiara "wikilink").[2]

## Georgian era

During the reign of [King George III](/King_George_III "wikilink") and
[Queen Charlotte](/Queen_Charlotte "wikilink"), the debutante dress
featured a [hoop skirt](/hoop_skirt "wikilink") and elaborate trimmings
which included a single ostrich plume worn on the head, even though
simple dresses with high waists were favored. During the reign of [King
George IV](/King_George_IV "wikilink"), the hoop skirt was excluded and
the style for a debutante gown became a variation of whatever was
considered popular for formal evening wear during the period.[3]

## Victorian era

[thumb\|A debutante dress ca.
1890](/File:StateLibQld_1_109648_Agnes_Melanie_Dickson_as_a_debutante,_ca._1890.jpg "wikilink")
Débutante dresses were almost always short-sleeved and had to have a low
neckline.[4] However a doctor's certificate could be presented at the
time stating that low cut was injurious to the young woman's health.[5]
After a débutante married, if she had married appropriately, she would
be re-presented at Court as a married woman, usually wearing her wedding
dress with alterations.[6]

[Queen Victoria](/Queen_Victoria "wikilink") was said to have hated
small feathers, so orders were sent out that Her Majesty wished to see
the feathers as the young lady approached. Late in Queen Victoria's
reign and into the court of [Edward VII](/Edward_VII "wikilink"), the
necessary headdress was three feathers arranged in a Prince of Wales
plume. A center feather slightly higher than the two on each side worn
slightly on the left side of the head.[7]

For young ladies and women to be presented who were in mourning, it was
acceptable for their dresses and veils to be black. No matter how cold
the weather was on this special day, absolutely no cloaks, shawls,
capes, or wraps of any kind were permitted to be worn. Those items
remained in the lady's carriage.[8] [thumb\|A Brisbane Debutante in
1900](/File:StateLibQld_2_168647_Miss_May_Goggs,_a_Brisbane_Debutante_in_1900.jpg "wikilink")

## References

[Category:18th-century
fashion](/Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](/Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Gowns](/Category:Gowns "wikilink") [Category:Formal
wear](/Category:Formal_wear "wikilink") [Category:History of
fashion](/Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Victorian
fashion](/Category:Victorian_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Debutantes](/Category:Debutantes "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](/Category:Dresses "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]