![](Conde_nast_fortuny.jpg "fig:Conde_nast_fortuny.jpg") wearing one of
the famous Fortuny tea gowns. This one has no tunic but is finely
pleated, in the Fortuny manner, and falls in long lines, closely
following the figure, to the floor."\]\]

The **Delphos gown** was a finely pleated silk dress first created in
about 1907 by [Henriette Negrin](Henriette_Negrin "wikilink") and her
husband [Mariano Fortuny y
Madrazo](Mariano_Fortuny_(designer) "wikilink") (1871–1949) and made
until about 1950.[1][2] It was inspired by, and named after, a classical
Greek statue, the [Charioteer of
Delphi](Charioteer_of_Delphi "wikilink").[3] Since the 1970s these gowns
have been desirable and collectable pieces of [vintage
clothing](vintage_clothing "wikilink"), with one selling for a world
record price of $10,000 in December 2001.[4]

## History

![](Purple_silk_Peplos_dress_by_Mariano_Fortuny.jpg "fig:Purple_silk_Peplos_dress_by_Mariano_Fortuny.jpg")
collection\]\] Working out of a 13th-century Venetian
[palazzo](Palace#Italy "wikilink"), Fortuny, a Spanish-born artist
turned textile designer, produced garments that the novelist [Marcel
Proust](Marcel_Proust "wikilink") declared "faithfully antique but
markedly original".[5][6] The "Delphos" was a deliberate reference to
the [chiton](Chiton_(costume) "wikilink") of ancient Greece and meant to
be worn without undergarments, since the chiton was itself a form of
underwear, a radical suggestion during the early years of the 20th
century.[7]

Fortuny became famous for his pleated dresses, the "Delphos" and the
related "Peplos".[8] The exact method of pleating was a closely guarded
secret involving heat, pressure and ceramic rods, which has never been
replicated.[9] On both types of dresses, glass [Murano
beads](Murano_beads "wikilink") are strung on a silk cord along each
side seam. The beads serve a functional purpose as well as being
decorative, as they weigh down the lightweight silk of the garment to
ensure a smooth fit enhancing the natural, uncorseted human form
beneath.[10] The construction of the Delphos became its own
decoration.[11] Although the "Delphos" eventually became formal wear,
with [Lauren Bacall](Lauren_Bacall "wikilink") wearing a vintage red
Delphos to the [1978 Oscars](50th_Academy_Awards "wikilink"),[12] it was
originally intended as informal clothing or a [tea
gown](tea_gown "wikilink") for wearing solely in the privacy of the
home.[13][14]

Delphos gowns were imported into Paris by the couturier [Paul
Poiret](Paul_Poiret "wikilink"), and the fashion house
[Babani](Babani "wikilink") which sold them to actresses such as
[Eleonora Duse](Eleonora_Duse "wikilink").[15]

![](Elena_vestida_con_túnica_amarilla_by_Joaquín_Sorolla,_1909.jpg "Elena_vestida_con_túnica_amarilla_by_Joaquín_Sorolla,_1909.jpg")

## The Delphos as art

Fortuny's garments, particularly the Delphos gown, have been valued for
their artistic and aesthetic qualities since their creation. The fashion
historian and writer [Colin McDowell](Colin_McDowell "wikilink")
considers Fortuny one of the creators of fashion as art,[16] and a
Delphos gown was one of only two garments contained in the collection of
the [Museum of Modern Art](MoMA "wikilink"), New York in 2003.[17]

During the 1910s and 1920s the Spanish painter [Joaquín
Sorolla](Joaquín_Sorolla "wikilink") painted several portraits of his
wife and other sitters wearing Delphos gowns, some of which are
preserved at the [Museo Sorolla](Museo_Sorolla "wikilink").[18] The
sculptor [Hamo Thornycroft](Hamo_Thornycroft "wikilink") described his
daughter Elfrida as looking lovely in a 'silk Greek clinging white
dress', a Delphos which Elfrida later donated to the [Victoria and
Albert Museum](Victoria_and_Albert_Museum "wikilink").[19]

In literature, Marcel Proust described Fortuny's clothes several times
in his epic novel *[In Search of Lost
Time](In_Search_of_Lost_Time "wikilink")*,[20] comparing them to musical
harmonies, although not explicitly calling them art.[21] {{-}}

## Notes

## Sources

-   [Edwardian promenade: Fortuny’s “Delphos”
    Gown](http://edwardianpromenade.com/fashion/fortunys-delphos-gown-2/)
-   [Dykes, Amy Renee: Documentation of a Mariano Fortuny Delphos gown.
    University of Georgia
    2003](https://athenaeum.libs.uga.edu/handle/10724/21276)

[Category:1900s fashion](Category:1900s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1910s fashion](Category:1910s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:1907
clothes](Category:1907_clothes "wikilink")

[1] [Henriette Fortuny: ritratto di una musa, La Donna dietro
l'Artista](https://www.google.com/culturalinstitute/beta/exhibit/2gJyXe7qWmpwKg?hl=it)

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9] "Mariano Fortuny: Dress (2001.702a)". In Heilbrunn Timeline of Art
History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000–.
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/2001.702a> (October 2006)

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14] Clare Suaro, [*"From the Collection: Dress by Mariano Fortuny y
Madrazo"*](http://www.drexel.edu/now/features/archive/2012/April/From-the-Collection-Fortuny)

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]