---
title: Dress boot
permalink: /Dress_boot/
---

**Dress boots** are short leather [boots](/boot "wikilink") typically
worn by men. Built like dress shoes, but with uppers covering the ankle,
versions of the boots are used as an alternative to these in bad weather
or rough outdoor situation, and as a traditional option for day time
[formalwear](/formalwear "wikilink").

## History

Until the end of the [Victorian](/Victorian_fashion "wikilink") period,
men did not wear shoes (which were reserved for women), preferring only
boots during daytime and [court slippers](/court_shoe "wikilink")
(pumps) when [eveningwear](/Full_evening_dress "wikilink") was worn.[1]
At that time, long riding boots were common and dress boots were for
more formal occasions, so [patent leather](/patent_leather "wikilink")
was often used, as well as ordinary black calf.[2] Gradually, these
boots became more common for formal evening use, so that by the
Edwardian era, patent boots were generally worn when there would be no
dancing. Patent leather use during day dropped, and formal morning
clothes soon incorporated either shoes or plain calf dress boots. In the
evening, the wearing of both boots and court slippers similarly declined
as shoes came to dominate, though slippers are still worn with [white
tie](/white_tie "wikilink").

As the use of riding boots declined with the advent of
[cars](/car "wikilink") (automobiles), another use for these short boots
developed as tougher alternatives to shoes for harsh weather or terrain,
where [hobnails](/hobnail "wikilink") would originally have been worn
with sturdier versions of town boots. Now that shoes are so much more
common than boots, and formal clothing is worn so infrequently, this is
now the most frequent use of dress boots.[3]

## Form

### Formal boots

With formalwear, dress boots are now only worn during the day, and are
usually now black [Oxford](/Oxford_shoe "wikilink") boots of Balmoral
cut (in the English, not American, sense, *i.e.* the only seam
descending to the welt is that of the toe-cap).[4] The upper is usually
softer, made of [canvas](/canvas "wikilink") or
[suede](/suede "wikilink"). Alternatively, the same Balmoral
[vamp](/Shoe#Vamp,_or_upper "wikilink") is used with a button-fastened
upper instead of using the more modern system of shoe laces.[5] The
tolerance for fit with this kind of boot is less, so they are more
expensive, though more traditional, and a button-hook on the end of a
[shoehorn](/shoehorn "wikilink") may be needed to do up the buttons. The
traditional use of [buff](/buff_(colour) "wikilink") for the uppers is
rare. The boots sometimes have toe-caps,[6] which can feature a brogued
seam, a reference to their original informal use for business.

### Outdoor boots

[thumb\|right\|Modern outdoor
boot](/File:8111_iron_ranger.jpg "wikilink") Although constructed
similarly to formal boots, casual or informal boots for harsher
conditions sacrifice elegance for practicality, using double leather
soles, or even rubber ones. The uppers are made of the same strong
leather as the vamp, and tougher materials like
[cordovan](/Shell_cordovan "wikilink") may be used. Walking boots in
this style can have open lacing, and [broguing](/brogue "wikilink") is
used as on country shoes. The main colour is brown. Boots of this design
were issued to the British and US armies in the 19th century: the [US
Civil War](/US_Civil_War "wikilink")-era [Jeff Davis
boots](/Jeff_Davis_boots "wikilink") had hobnails and the British
[ammunition boots](/ammunition_boot "wikilink") remained in service
until [World War II](/World_War_II "wikilink"). More recently, boots of
this style have seen a revival as part of the
[Neo-Edwardian](/Neo-Edwardian "wikilink") fashion popular among British
indie kids.[7]

## Bibliography

-

-

## References

<references/>
[Category:19th-century
fashion](/Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1900s
fashion](/Category:1900s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](/Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](/Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Leather
goods](/Category:Leather_goods "wikilink") [Category:Formal
wear](/Category:Formal_wear "wikilink") [Category:Semi-formal
wear](/Category:Semi-formal_wear "wikilink")

[1] Croonborg (1907). p. 211

[2]

[3] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 95

[4] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 93

[5]

[6] [Dressy winter
boots](http://uk.askmen.com/owning-the-holidays-2010/fashion/4b_2010-winter-boots.html)

[7] [Rag and
bone](http://uk.askmen.com/fashion/trends_400/457_label-profile-rag-bone.html)