---
title: Evening gown
permalink: /Evening_gown/
---

[thumb\|[Maria Grazia Cucinotta](Maria_Grazia_Cucinotta "wikilink")
wearing a black evening gown at the Venice Film
Festival](/File:Maria_Grazia_Cucinotta_-_nicogenin_-_66ème_Festival_de_Venise_(Mostra)_2.jpg "wikilink")
An **evening gown**, **evening dress** or **gown** is a long flowing
[dress](/dress "wikilink") usually worn to formal occasions. The drop
ranges from [ballerina](/Ballerina_skirt "wikilink") (mid-calf to just
above the ankles), [tea](/Tea_length "wikilink") (above the ankles), to
[full-length](/Skirt_length "wikilink").[1] Evening gowns are usually
made of luxurious fabrics such as
[chiffon](/chiffon_(fabric) "wikilink"), [velvet](/velvet "wikilink"),
[satin](/satin "wikilink"), [organza](/organza "wikilink"), etc.
[Silk](/Silk "wikilink") is a popular fibre for many evening gowns.
Although the terms are used interchangeably, [ball
gowns](/ball_gown "wikilink") and evening gowns differ in that a ball
gown will always have a full [skirt](/skirt "wikilink") and a fitted
[bodice](/bodice "wikilink"), while an evening gown can be any
[silhouette](/silhouette "wikilink")—[sheath](/Sheath_dress "wikilink"),
mermaid, [A-line](/A-line_(clothing) "wikilink"), or
[trumpet](/Evening_gown#Trumpet "wikilink") shaped—and may have an
[empire](/Empire_waist "wikilink") or [dropped
waist](/dropped_waist "wikilink").

## History

[thumb\|left\|Evening gowns shown at a Los Angeles [fashion
show](fashion_show "wikilink"),
1947](/Image:Evening_gowns,_1947.jpg "wikilink")

### Early modern period

Evening wear for women, sometimes also known as [court
dress](/Court_uniform_and_dress_in_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink") based
on its creation at [royal courts](/Court_(royal) "wikilink"), has its
origins in the 15th century with the rise of the [Burgundian
court](/Duchy_of_Burgundy "wikilink") and its fashionable and
fashion-conscious ruler [Philip the Good](/Philip_the_Good "wikilink").
[Wool](/Wool "wikilink"), in various weaves, was the most dominant
fabric for dresses, and the ladies of the court often simply added a
[train](/train_(clothing) "wikilink") to their
[kirtle](/kirtle "wikilink") for formal occasions. Rich fabrics and
fibres were usually the domain of the nobility, and clothing was still
used as an identifier of social rank and status. The dawn of the
[Renaissance](/Renaissance "wikilink") slowly changed the rigid social
rank system, and allowed wealthy
[Patricians](/Patrician_(ancient_Rome) "wikilink") and merchants to
visibly display their success. The art of weaving silk was firmly
established in the Mediterranean around 1400, and as a result, silk
weaves became fashionable for those who could afford them. Dresses for
court balls and similar festivities were often made of intricately woven
silk and trimmed with expensive furs to highlight the wearer's social
status.

The vibrant court life of the 16th and 17th centuries with its focus on
art, literature and music created a fertile environment for feminine
formal clothing. Elaborate dinners, dances, and theatre productions
allowed fashionable ladies to showcase their finery. The [Italian
Renaissance](/Italian_Renaissance "wikilink") courts were the pinnacle
of style and elegance in Europe. With the advent of the
[Baroque](/Baroque "wikilink") era, the focus began to shift to
[France](/France "wikilink") and the court of [Louis
XIV](/Louis_XIV "wikilink"). 17th century court dresses featured draped
skirts with long trains, tight bodices, low necklines trimmed with lace,
and embroidered, lace- and-ribbon-trimmed full sleeves. Rich silk
weaves, such as satin, taffeta and velvet created luxurious gowns. In
the 18th century, formal dress started as the
[mantua](/mantua_(clothing) "wikilink"), but later developed into the
elaborate [sack-back gown](/sack-back_gown "wikilink"). The
[farthingale](/farthingale "wikilink") so popular during the 16th/17th
centuries, evolved into the [pannier](/pannier_(clothing) "wikilink") to
give dresses and skirts extra volume and the desired court silhouette.

[thumb\|upright\|White cotton evening dress ca.
1804-05](/File:Evening_dress_MET_DT7445.jpg "wikilink") During this
entire period, a ball or evening dress was synonymous with [court
dress](/court_dress "wikilink"), as balls took place at court or in the
palaces and salons of the nobility who copied the latest fashions at the
courts. Starting with the late 18th century, the term "evening or ball
gown" emerged, as balls and formal dances were no longer the sole domain
of royals and aristocrats. The [French
Revolution](/French_Revolution "wikilink") had caused social upheaval,
and firmly cemented the place of upper-middle and upper class citizens
in society. A common silhouette for evening wear, just as for day wear,
was the high-waisted [Empire](/Empire_dress "wikilink") or
[Regency](/Regency_dress "wikilink") dress. Evening versions featured
lower necklines, short sleeves and elaborate fabrics and embroidery.

### 19th and 20th century

Evening styles changed dramatically during the 19th century, and evolved
from the relatively simple classically inspired lines of the early
decades to progressively fuller skirts and, at times, sleeves (1830s and
1840s). The styles ranged from having huge sleeves in the 1830s, to
off-the-shoulder and with wide flounces in the 1840s, to very low-necked
in the 1850s, to having low necklines and short sleeves in the 1860s, to
long and lean with a bustle and very short sleeves in the 1870s, to
sleeveless, low-necked, and worn with gloves in the 1880s, to having a
squared decolletage, a wasp-waist cut, and skirts with long trains in
the 1890s. The 19th century distinguished between relatively high-necked
dinner gowns for formal dinners and soirees, evening gowns for dances
and theatre events, and ball gowns for the most formal affairs including
balls and the opera.[2] [thumb\|left\|upright\|Lavender evening gown by
Irish designer [Sybil Connolly](Sybil_Connolly "wikilink") from c.
1970](/File:Lavender_evening_gown_by_Sybil_Connolly.jpg "wikilink")
During the [Edwardian era](/Edwardian_era "wikilink"), or [Belle
Epoque](/Belle_Epoque "wikilink"), the s-shaped figure was fashionable,
which included a very narrow waist [3] Immediately preceding and during
World War I, lines became looser and more fluid as a precursor to the
boyish silhouettes of the 1920s. Later, in the 1920s, the hemlines of
evening gowns rose and cuts were very simple to match the new life style
of the Flapper era. The 1930s introduced bias cuts and artificial
fibres. Along with the Empire cut, over the years the sheath, mermaid,
A-line, and trumpet shapes became popular. Also, the dropped waist and
princess styles were popular, depending on the era. [Grace
Kelly](/Grace_Kelly "wikilink") is noted for wearing understated evening
gowns.

### Contemporary fashion

Today, the evening gown comes in different silhouettes and even lengths,
but the full-skirted [ball gown](/ball_gown "wikilink") remains the
pinnacle of formality. Evening gowns are worn at various semi-formal
black-tie (and sometimes white tie) functions, including formal dinners,
opera and theatre premieres, formal dances, evening wedding receptions,
and charity balls.

## See also

-   [Ball gown](/Ball_gown "wikilink")
-   [Cocktail dress](/Cocktail_dress "wikilink")
-   [Wedding gown](/Wedding_gown "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Evening Dresses at Chicago History Museum Digital
    Collection](http://digitalcollection.chicagohistory.org/cdm/search/collection/p16029coll3/searchterm/evening%20dress*/field/subjec/mode/all/conn/and/order/title)

[Category:15th-century
fashion](/Category:15th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:16th-century
fashion](/Category:16th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:17th-century
fashion](/Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](/Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](/Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](/Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](/Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](/Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](/Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](/Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Evening](/Category:Evening "wikilink")
[Category:Gowns](/Category:Gowns "wikilink")

[no:Livkjole](/no:Livkjole "wikilink") [nn:Kjole og
kvitt](/nn:Kjole_og_kvitt "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]