![](farshi.jpg "fig:farshi.jpg") **Farshi Pajama** (also Paijama)
([Urdu](Urdu "wikilink"): فرشی پائجامہ, [Hindi](Hindi "wikilink"): फारसी
पजामा, [Bengali](Bengali_language "wikilink"):ফর্শি পায়জামা) is a
woman's dress that was worn between early 20th centuries in
[Muslim](Muslim "wikilink") courts of [Oudh](Oudh "wikilink") by royalty
and ladies from privileged classes of Uttar Pradesh (formerly [United
Provinces of Agra and
Oudh](United_Provinces_of_Agra_and_Oudh "wikilink") in North India).
Modeled after the flowing [gowns](gown "wikilink") worn by
[British](Great_Britain "wikilink") noblewomen,[1] the complete outfit
consists of three basic parts – the kurta or a long shirt, the
[dupatta](dupatta "wikilink") or the long
[stole](Stole_(shawl) "wikilink") (an essential piece in traditional
Indian wear covering the head and chest), and the third and most
important, the farshi pajama, which is a flowing two-legged skirt held
by drawstrings. It falls straight to the ankles from where it starts
flaring flowing copiously onto the floor. The farshi pajama in this era
is often called Farshi Gharara, a term not used before the mid-20th
century and is considered a distortion. The confusion is said to be
because of the Farshi Pajama's similarity with the
[Gharara](Gharara "wikilink").

Farshi means "associated with the "farsh" or floor (for example *farshi
baithak* which is associated with sitting on the floor). When combined
with the word [Pajama](Pajama "wikilink"), the term evolves to mean a
bottom-wear garment that falls generously on the floor and trails as one
walks. In reality, when walking, an expert wearer holds the dress by
carefully pulling up and folding the excess flaring trail and holding it
in her left hand, keeping the right one free. The large quantity
(historically, 9-15 yards) of expensive cloth, embroidered using the art
of [goldwork (embroidery)](goldwork_(embroidery) "wikilink") and
[sterling silver](sterling_silver "wikilink") wire threads
([Karchob](Karchob "wikilink")/[Zari](Zari "wikilink")/[Zardozi](Zardozi "wikilink")
etc.), used to make a farshi gharara mainly reflects the grandeur and
extravagance of the nobles and rulers of that era.

Different eras brought changes to the fashion and cuts of the dress.
These variations were also dependent from one princely state's court to
another.

Modified, smaller-length versions are still, but rarely, worn by women
in weddings in [India](India "wikilink") and
[Pakistan](Pakistan "wikilink") to recreate bygone elegance.

Movies such as *[Umrao Jaan](Umrao_Jaan_(1981_film) "wikilink")* (1981)
and *[Shatranj Ke Khilari](Shatranj_Ke_Khilari "wikilink")* (1977) that
depict Muslim culture of 19th-century Lucknow show noblewomen and royal
courtesans wearing farshi pajamas.

## References

[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Indian
clothing](Category:Indian_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Bangladeshi
clothing](Category:Bangladeshi_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Pakistani
clothing](Category:Pakistani_clothing "wikilink")

[1] <http://www.india-seminar.com/2008/585/585_ritu_kumar.htm>