---
title: Granny dress
permalink: /Granny_dress/
---

[thumb\|Late 1960s pink and purple cotton print dress by [Laura
Ashley](Laura_Ashley "wikilink") with fringed shoulder
bag](/File:Late_1960s_pink_and_purple_cotton_print_dress_by_Laura_Ashley_with_fringed_shoulder_bag.jpg "wikilink")
A **granny dress** was a long one-piece [gown](/gown "wikilink") or
[dress](/dress "wikilink") that was popular with young women in the
[United States](/United_States "wikilink") and
[Britain](/United_Kingdom "wikilink") in the mid-1960s to the 1970s.
Granny dresses were loose-fitting and often printed with light or pastel
colors. They had a vaguely [Victorian-era](/Victorian_era "wikilink")
feel to them.

## About

Granny dresses had a high [neckline](/neckline "wikilink") and the
[hems](/Hemline "wikilink") were ankle length.[1] They could also be
decorated with buttons, lace, ruffles and may display [leg-of-mutton
sleeves](/Sleeve "wikilink").[2] As the trend continued, the hemline of
the dress could also end just above the knees.[3][4] The dress became
more sophisticated by the late 1960s. The dresses were also
inexpensive.[5]

The look was part of a greater
neo-[Victorian](/Victorian_era "wikilink") trend.[6][7] A
*[Life](/Life_(magazine) "wikilink")* magazine spread featured [Ringo
Starr](/Ringo_Starr "wikilink") with a model wearing a
[crocheted](/Crochet "wikilink") granny dress and which also featured
women in Victorian-like settings.[8] The style reminded people of a
simpler, less complicated time.[9]

The trend was also firmly situated in the youth movement.[10] It tended
to be associated with both [mod](/Mod_(subculture) "wikilink") and
[hippie](/hippie "wikilink") groups.[11] The granny dress offered an
alternative to mini dresses and were a symbol of rebellion. Girls talked
about it taking "nerve" to wear such an old-fashioned style.[12]

## History

Granny dresses are most often associated with the designer, [Laura
Ashley](/Laura_Ashley "wikilink"), who started selling these dresses to
women in the [Welsh](/Wales "wikilink") countryside in the late
1950s.[13] The trend made it to the [United
States](/United_States "wikilink") where it was embraced in
[California](/California "wikilink") and then moved
eastward.[14][15][16] Granny dress parties and dances were held.[17][18]

One account credits the creation of the dress to designer, George
Wilner, who worked at Mr. Aref of California.[19] Wilner based his
design on a [calico](/calico "wikilink") dress that a retailer from
[Glendale](/Glendale,_California "wikilink") showed him.[20] Wilner
adapted the calico dress design to be more of an empire-style, similar
to dresses worn by [Empress
Josephine](/Empress_Jos√©phine "wikilink").[21] An article describing the
"new craze" credited the origin to [Los
Angeles](/Los_Angeles "wikilink").[22]

An [apocryphal](/Apocrypha "wikilink") story about the origin of the
dress was that it came into fashion after a dancer was told by a
television [disc jockey](/disc_jockey "wikilink") that her dress was too
short.[23] In response, the dancer found a floor-length dress to wear
and started a fashion craze.[24] Another apocryphal origin story had an
old woman wearing such a dress on a tour of "night spots" in Los
Angeles.[25] The woman's youthful vigor "attracted attention" and a
designer, believing her style of dress helped her stay active, copied
her dress design.[26]

Granny dresses have also been popular in various regions in
[Egypt](/Egypt "wikilink") in the 1980s.

In the 1990s, there was a brief resurgence of the dress at the same time
[grunge](/Grunge_fashion "wikilink") was popular.[27] This time, granny
dresses were considered any kind of loose-fitting
[frock](/frock "wikilink") and could be paired with nearly any
accessory.[28]

## Controversy

Students wearing granny dresses to school were suspended or sent home.
In [Oakland](/Oakland,_California "wikilink") in 1965, girls were sent
home for wearing granny dresses.[29] In [Kansas City,
Missouri](/Kansas_City,_Missouri "wikilink"), a mother wore her own
granny dress to school in an attempt to convince the principal to allow
her daughter to wear one.[30] In [Trumansburg, New
York](/Trumansburg,_New_York "wikilink"), in 1966, three sisters were
suspended from school for wearing the dress.[31] The school's attorney
claimed that both safety and possible class disruption were the reasons
the dress was banned.[32] The principal of the school felt that there
was a danger of tripping on stairs because of the length of the
dresses.[33] Laura M. Lorraine, dean of the Analy Union High School also
thought the length of the dresses made them difficult for walking up
stairs.[34] The school attorney felt that granny dresses were "extreme"
and may encourage students to adopt other extreme forms of dressing.[35]
In some cases, school authorities just stated that it wasn't "suitable
school attire."[36] In 1966, a *[Dear Abby](/Dear_Abby "wikilink")*
column featured a letter from a girl who was sent to the principal's
office for wearing a granny dress.[37]

## References

### Citations

### Sources

-

-

[Category:Dresses](/Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing](/Category:History_of_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](/Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]