**Khandua** (Also **Maniabandi** or **Kataki**) is a traditional
"bandha" or [ikat](ikat "wikilink") [sari](sari "wikilink") produced
from [Odisha](Odisha "wikilink") [1][2][3][4][5] worn by women during
wedding [6][7] and a special type of which is worn by
[Jagannath](Jagannath "wikilink"). The clothes contain texts of [Gita
Govinda](Gita_Govinda "wikilink") on them. [8] *Kenduli Khandua*, a
special form of Khandua of 12Â ft and 2 *kani* (each *kani* measures the
length of a hand) is offered to [Jagannath](Jagannath "wikilink") to
wear as khandua with stanzas and illustration from Gita Govinda. [9][10]

## Etymology

The word *Khandua* in [Odia](Odia_language "wikilink") translates to the
cloth worn in the lower half of the body. Traditionally Kentuli Khandua
is offered to Jagannath as lower cloth. Due to the place of origin is
Cuttak and Maniabandha, the other two names *Kataki* and *Maniabandhi*
are originated.[11]

## History

Weaver communities of Maniabandha and Nuapatana [12] [13] of
[Cuttack](Cuttack_district "wikilink") traditionally weave this kind of
pata. During the rule of Gajapatis Sarees are made and transported to
[Jagannath Temple](Jagannath_Temple "wikilink"). Paramananda Patanaika,
the king of [Badakhemundi](Badakhemundi "wikilink") (Nilakantha Deva)
was offered *khandua sari* made of one piece of khandua silk called
caukandika.[14][15]

## Color and Design

Khandua is traditionally red or orange in color. The red color is
prepared naturally from the *[shorea
robusta](shorea_robusta "wikilink")* (sal tree). [16] The design motif
has an auspicious elephant that represents [Buddha](Buddha "wikilink")
surrounded by trailing vine with peacocks in it, a large many petaled
flower, a unique Orissan animal called
[Nabagunjara](Nabagunjara "wikilink"), a [deula](deula "wikilink")
[kumbha](kumbha "wikilink"). The elephant in Khandua ikat from Nuapatana
usually varies from elephant motives in ikat from [Sambalpuri
sari](Sambalpuri_sari "wikilink") as well as ikat from other parts of
Orissa.[17] Khandua has plain borders in contrary to borders with motifs
in case of the other ikat of Orissa. [18]

## References

[Category:Geographical indications in
Odisha](Category:Geographical_indications_in_Odisha "wikilink")
[Category:Saris](Category:Saris "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Indian
clothing](Category:Indian_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Odia
culture](Category:Odia_culture "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]