![](Wedding_kimono.jpg "fig:Wedding_kimono.jpg")
![](Uchikake.jpg "fig:Uchikake.jpg")
![](Stylish_person_at_Fukuoka_City_Hall.jpg "fig:Stylish_person_at_Fukuoka_City_Hall.jpg")

The is a [traditional Japanese](Culture_of_Japan "wikilink") garment,
and the national dress of Japan. The kimono is a T-shaped wrapped-front
garment constructed of mostly rectangular pieces of fabric, and is sewn
with set sleeve lengths, hem lengths and little tailoring to the body.
The kimono is split into a number of varieties based on occasion and
formality. These are denoted through motifs and motif placement, fabric
choice, type of decoration and colour.

The kimono has a set method of construction, with its own various terms
and units of measurement to describe this. Kimono are always worn left
collar overlapping the right, unless the wearer happens to be
deceased.[1] Kimono are worn with a wide sash called an
[obi](obi_(sash) "wikilink"), which can be tied in a variety of ways
based on gender, occasion and obi type.

Most variants of kimono are worn with an underkimono called a
*nagajuban*, and kimono may be worn with *[zōri](zōri "wikilink")* or
*[geta](Geta_(footwear) "wikilink")*, though other forms of footwear can
be worn, excluding formal occasions. When wearing traditional footwear
such as *zōri* or *geta*, *[tabi](tabi "wikilink")* socks are always
worn.

The word "kimono" literally means "thing to wear"; it stems from the
verb and the noun .[2] The plural of kimono is "kimono", as Japanese
does not distinguish plural nouns, though in English the plural
"kimonos" is sometimes used.

Kimono are, in modern times, mostly worn to formal events, but can also
be worn as everyday clothing. Kimono can be worn for important [public
holidays and festivals](Public_holidays_in_Japan "wikilink"), weddings
and funerals, but there are few occasions a person would be obligated to
wear kimono to in the modern day.

Over time, the kimono has garnered a reputation for being uncomfortable
and difficult to wear; however, it has experienced a number of revivals
in popularity throughout the decades, and since the turn of the century,
kimono enthusiasts have grown in number, promoting the garment as a
comfortable and fashionable item of dress.

The people who tend to wear kimono most often - in some cases on a daily
basis - are older men and women, geisha, maiko and sumo wrestlers, with
sumo wrestlers being required to wear traditional Japanese dress
whenever appearing in public.[3]

## History

![](Takamat1.jpg "fig:Takamat1.jpg"), 7th century) \|250x250px\]\]
![](Genji_emaki_YADORIGI_2.JPG "fig:Genji_emaki_YADORIGI_2.JPG"), 12th
century) \]\] ![](Iwasa_Matabei_001.jpg "fig:Iwasa_Matabei_001.jpg") ![
The overall silhouette transformed due to the evolution of obi, sleeves,
and the layering of heavy fabrics. (Utagawa Kuniyoshi, Plum Blossoms at
Night, woodblock print, 19th century)
](Plum_Blossoms_at_Night_(Yoru_no_ume).jpg "fig: The overall silhouette transformed due to the evolution of obi, sleeves, and the layering of heavy fabrics. (Utagawa Kuniyoshi, Plum Blossoms at Night, woodblock print, 19th century) ")

Chinese fashion had a huge influence on Japan from the [Kofun
period](Kofun_period "wikilink") to the early Heian period as a result
of mass immigration from the continent and a Japanese envoy to the Tang
dynasty. There is an opinion that *Kimono* was basically derived from
the [Chinese clothing](Ancient_Chinese_clothing "wikilink")[4][5] in the
[Wu](Wu_(region) "wikilink") region. During Japan's [Heian
period](Heian_period "wikilink") (794–1192 AD), the kimono became
increasingly stylized, though one still wore a half-apron, called a
*mo*, over it.[6] During the [Muromachi
age](Muromachi_period "wikilink") (1336–1573 AD), the
*[Kosode](Kosode "wikilink")*, a single kimono formerly considered
underwear, began to be worn without the [hakama](hakama "wikilink")
(trousers, divided skirt) over it, and thus began to be held closed by
an *obi* "belt".[7] During the Edo period (1603–1867 AD), the sleeves
began to grow in length, especially among unmarried women, and the *Obi*
became wider, with various styles of tying coming into fashion.[8] Since
then, the basic shape of both the men's and women's kimono has remained
essentially unchanged. Kimono made with exceptional skill from fine
materials have been regarded as great works of art.[9]

The formal kimono was replaced by the more convenient Western clothes
and *[yukata](yukata "wikilink")* as everyday wear. After an edict by
[Emperor Meiji](Emperor_Meiji "wikilink"),[10] police, railroad men and
teachers moved to Western clothes. The Japanese began shedding kimono in
favor of Western dress in the 1870s. The Western clothes became the army
and [school uniform](school_uniform "wikilink") for boys. After the
[1923 Great Kantō earthquake](1923_Great_Kantō_earthquake "wikilink"),
kimono wearers often became victims of robbery because they could not
run very fast due to the restricting nature of the kimono on the body
and [geta](geta_(footwear) "wikilink") clogs. Also, kimono produced by
traditional methods have become too expensive for the average family. A
common price for a kimono- and-obi ensemble is over $1,000, according to
the Tokyo Wholesalers Association. Many cost far more. Even on some
special occasions such as wedding day, an elaborate kimono is de
rigueur, most people choose to rent one. The Tokyo Women's & Children's
Wear Manufacturers' Association (東京婦人子供服組合) promoted Western
clothes. Between 1920 and 1930 the [sailor
outfit](Japanese_school_uniform "wikilink") replaced the undivided
*hakama* in school uniforms for girls.[11] The national uniform,
*[Kokumin-fuku](Kokumin-fuku "wikilink")*, a type of Western clothes,
was mandated for males in 1940.[12][13][14] Today most people wear
Western clothes and wear the breezier and more comfortable *yukata* for
special occasions.

In the Western world, kimono-styled women's jackets, similar to a casual
[cardigan](Cardigan_(sweater) "wikilink"),[15] gained public attention
as a popular fashion item in 2014.[16] Kimono are also worn on special
occasions such as coming of age ceremonies and many other traditional
Japanese events.

In 2019, the mayor of Kyoto announced that his staff were working to
register “Kimono Culture” on [UNESCO](UNESCO "wikilink")'s [intangible
cultural heritage](intangible_cultural_heritage "wikilink") list.[17]

## Textiles and construction of kimono

![](Komono_cropped.png "Komono_cropped.png")

Over time, the proportions of kimono have evolved differently for men
and women. Men's kimono should fall approximately to the ankle, with no
hip fold – the *ohashori*. A woman's kimono, however, should be as tall
as she is, in order to allow the correct length for the ohashori to be
formed. An ideally tailored kimono has sleeves that fall to the wrist
when the arms are lowered; however, in informal situations, this is not
strictly necessary, and indeed, kimono are worn casually by some women
without the ohashori.

Kimono textiles can to be classified into two categories: Gofuku(呉服),
which indicates silk textiles in general, for luxuries and cotton/hemp
Futomono(太物) for everyday wear. Gofuku was named after 呉 (Wú) in
ancient China, where the technology of silk fabrics originated from.
Cotton clothing is called Momenfuku (木綿服) whereas hemp clothing is
called Asafuku (麻服) in Japanese. Cotton/hemp fabrics are generally
called as Futomono (太物, Thick materials) as the fiber of these
materials are thicker compared to that of silk. Till the end of the Edo
period, tailoring of these fabrics were handled respectively at Gofuku
store (Gofuku Dana) and Futomono stores (Futomono Dana), however, after
the Meiji period, kimono was not worn as daily wear very often and
Futomono stores eventually went out of business.

Kimono are traditional made from a single bolt of fabric called a
*tanmono*, which varies in size and shape for both men and women.
Tanmono are roughly 36 cm wide and 11.5m long for women[18] , and the
entire bolt is used to make one kimono. Some men's tanmono are woven
especially long to include enough fabric for a haori, juban and kimono
as well, as men's kimono can come in matching sets of the same fabric
and colour.

The finished kimono consists of four main strips of fabric – two panels
covering the body and two panels forming the sleeves – with additional
smaller strips forming the narrow front panels and the collar.
Children's kimono commonly consist of just three main panels, as only
one width of fabric is needed for the body.[19]

Historically, kimono were often taken apart for washing in separate
panels, and were resewn by hand. Because of the standardised method of
construction, and the fact that no fabric is wasted, the kimono can
easily be retailored to fit the changing body, or indeed another
person.[20]

The maximum width of the sleeve is dictated by the width of the fabric.
The distance from the center of the spine to the end of the sleeve could
not exceed twice the width of the fabric. Traditional kimono fabric was
typically no more than wide. Thus the distance from spine to wrist could
not exceed a maximum of roughly . Modern kimono fabric is woven as wide
as to accommodate modern Japanese body sizes. Very tall or heavy people,
such as [sumo](sumo "wikilink") wrestlers, must have kimono custom-made
by either joining multiple bolts, weaving custom-width fabric, or using
non-standard size fabric.[21]

Traditionally, kimono are sewn by hand; even machine-made kimono require
substantial hand-stitching. Kimono fabrics are frequently hand-made and
-decorated. Techniques such as *yūzen* dye resist are used for applying
decoration and patterns to the base cloth. Repeating patterns that cover
a large area of a kimono are traditionally done with the *yūzen* resist
technique and a stencil. Over time there have been many variations in
color, fabric, and style, as well as accessories such as the obi.

The kimono and obi are traditionally made of hemp, linen, silk, silk
brocade, silk crepes (such as *chirimen*) and satin weaves (such as
*[rinzu](rinzu "wikilink")*). Modern kimono are widely available in
less-expensive easy-care fabrics such as rayon, cotton sateen, cotton,
polyester and other synthetic fibers. Silk is still considered the ideal
fabric.

![](Girls_in_kimonos.jpg "Girls_in_kimonos.jpg")

Customarily, woven patterns and dyed repeat patterns are considered
informal. Formal kimono have free-style designs dyed over the whole
surface or along the hem.[22]

[23] During the Heian period, kimono were worn with [up to a dozen or
more colorful contrasting layers](Junihitoe "wikilink"), with each
combination of colors being a named pattern.[24] Today, the kimono is
normally worn with a single layer on top of one or more undergarments.

The pattern of the kimono can determine in which season it should be
worn. For example, a pattern with [butterflies](butterflies "wikilink")
or [cherry blossoms](cherry_blossoms "wikilink") would be worn in
spring. Watery designs are common during the summer. A popular autumn
motif is the russet [leaf of the Japanese
maple](Japanese_Maple "wikilink"); for winter, designs may include
[bamboo](bamboo "wikilink"), [pine trees](pine_tree "wikilink") and
[plum blossoms](plum_blossoms "wikilink") ([three friends of
winter](Three_Friends_of_Winter "wikilink")).

A popular form of textile art in Japan is [shibori](shibori "wikilink")
(intricate tie dye), found on some of the more expensive kimono and
[haori](haori "wikilink") kimono jackets. Patterns are created by
minutely binding the fabric and masking off areas, then dying it,
usually by hand. When the bindings are removed, an undyed pattern is
revealed. Shibori work can be further enhanced with yuzen (hand applied)
drawing or painting with textile dyes or with embroidery; it is then
known as tsujigahana. Shibori textiles are very time-consuming to
produce and require great skill, so the textiles and garments created
from them are very expensive and highly prized.

Old kimono have historically been recycled in various ways, depending on
the type of kimono and its original use. Kimono were shortened, with the
okumi taken off and the collar re-sewn, to make haori, or would simply
be cut at the waist to create a side-tying jacket. After marriage or a
certain age, young women would shorten the sleeves of their kimono, and
extra material taken from kimono could be used to lengthen it at the
waist, create an obi, or was used to patch similar kimono.

Kimono were also used to create [dounuki](dounuki "wikilink"),
underkimono worn on top of the juban, and the material would show at the
sleeve, hem and collar. Kimono were also used to create juban
themselves, and after wearing layered kimono fell out of fashion, create
a false underlayer – a [hiyoku](hiyoku "wikilink") – was another use for
old kimono. They could also be resewn into kimono for children.

Historically, skilled craftsmen would laboriously cut old silk kimono
into strips roughly 1 cm wide to weave into obi, called *saki-ori* obi.
The technique was a kind of rag-weaving, creating a mostly one-sided obi
that was relatively narrow and informal. Saki-ori obi are prized for
their craftsmanship and rustic quality today, as they would have taken
many hours to create, and saki-ori obi often feature patterns of
stripes, checks and arrows. The technique is kept alive to this day by
craftspeople interested in rustic arts.

### Parts

![](Kimono_parts.png "Kimono_parts.png")

These terms refer to parts of a kimono:

-   : upper lining on a woman's kimono.

-   : collar.

-   : hem guard.

-   : sleeve below the armhole.

-   : a belt used to tuck excess cloth away from the seeing public.

-   : front main panel, excluding sleeves. The covering portion of the
    other side of the back, maemigoro is divided into "right maemigoro"
    and "left maemigoro".

-   : opening under the sleeve.

-   : front inside panel on the front edge of the left and right,
    excluding the sleeve of a kimono. Until the collar, down to the
    bottom of the dress goes, up and down part of the strip of cloth.
    Have sewn the front body. It is also called "袵".

-   : sleeve.[25]

-   : sleeve opening.

-   : kimono armhole.

-   : lower lining.

-   : sleeve pouch.

-   : over-collar (collar protector).

-   : inner collar.

-   : back main panel, excluding sleeves, covering the back portion.
    They are basically sewn back-centered and consist of "right
    ushiromigoro" and "left ushiromigoro", but for wool fabric, the
    ushiromigoro consists of one piece.

## Cost

![](Kiminorecycleshop-asakusa01.jpg "Kiminorecycleshop-asakusa01.jpg")

A brand-new women's kimono may easily exceed US$10,000;[26] a complete
outfit, with kimono, undergarments, obi, socks, shoes and accessories
can easily exceed US$20,000, with a single brand-new obi costing upwards
of several thousand dollars.

However, most kimono owned by kimono hobbyists or practitioners of the
traditional arts are far less expensive. Cheaper and synthetic fabrics
can substitute for traditional hand-dyed silk, and modern-day brand-new
synthetic kimono are sold as 'washable' and easy to care for. Some
people make their own kimono, as kimono do not require a paper pattern
or extensive fitting to sew, and can be made of whatever fabrics the
owner wants.

Many kimono are also bought second-hand from vintage stores, a lucrative
business in Japan, as kimono do not go out of fashion, though certain
motifs and colours can be attributed to different eras.[27] These can
cost as little as ¥100 (about $0.9) at thrift stores in the Tokyo area,
and the Nishijin district of Kyoto is also known for its pre-loved
kimono markets. Even antique obi can retail cheaply, though they can be
stained and fragile. Women's obi, however, mostly remain an expensive
item; though simply-patterned or relatively plain obi can retail
second-hand for as little as ¥500 (about $4.5), even a used, well-kept
and high-quality obi can cost upwards of $300, as they are often
decorated with embroidery, goldwork and hand-painted by craftsmen. Men's
obi, even those made from silk, tend to be much less expensive, as they
are narrower, shorter and less decorative than those worn by women.

## Types of kimono

Kimono range in variation from extremely formal to very casual. The
formality of a woman's kimono is determined mostly by pattern placement,
decoration style, fabric choice and colour. The formality of men's
kimono differs, in that it is determined more by fabric choice and
coordination elements (*hakama*, haori, etc.) than decoration, as men's
kimono tend to be one colour with motifs only visible when looked at
closely.

In both cases, formality is also determined by the number and type of
[*kamon*](mon_(badge) "wikilink") (crests). Five mon (*itsutsu mon*) are
the most formal, three mon (*mitsu mon*) are mid-formality, and one mon
(*hitotsu mon*) is the least formal, used for occasions such as tea
ceremony. The type of mon adds formality as well, with a "full sun"
(*hinata*) mon being the most formal, a "mid-shadow" (*nakakage*) mon
being mid-formality, and a "shadow" (*kage*) mon being the least formal.
Embroidered mon, called *nui mon*, are also seen.[28]

Formality can also be determined by the type and colour of accessories,
such as weave of *obijime* and the style of *obiage*.

### Women's kimono

The typical woman's kimono outfit may consist of up to twelve or more
separate pieces; some outfits, such as formal wedding kimono, may
require the assistance of licensed kimono dressers, though usually this
is due to the wearer's inexperience with kimono and the difficult-to-tie
nature of formal *obi musubi*. Most professional kimono dressers are
found in Japan, where they work out of hair salons, as specialist
businesses, or freelance.

Choosing an appropriate type of kimono requires knowledge of the
wearer's age, occasionally marital status (though less so in modern
times), the formality of the occasion at hand, and the season. Choice of
fabric is also dependent on these factors, though some fabrics - such as
crepe and *rinzū* - are never seen in certain varieties of kimono, and
some fabrics such as *shusu* (satin) silk are barely ever seen in kimono
altogether, instead being worn on the obi.

Though length of kimono, collar style and the way the sleeves are sewn
on varies for *susohiki* kimono, in all other types of women's kimono,
the construction generally does not change; the collar is set back
slightly into the nape of the neck, the sleeves are only attached at the
shoulder, not all the way down the sleeve length, and the kimono's
length from shoulder to hem should generally equal the entire height of
the woman wearing it, to allow for the *ohashori* hip fold.

Sleeve length increases for *furisode* - young women's formal dress -
but young women are not limited to wearing only *furisode*, as outside
of formal occasions that warrant it, can wear all other types of women's
kimono such as *irotomesode* and *komon*.

#### *Yukata*

*[Yukata](Yukata "wikilink")* () are casual cotton summer kimono.
*Yukata* were originally very simple indigo and white cotton kimono,
little more than a bathrobe never worn outside the house. However, from
roughly the mid-1980s onwards, they began to be produced in a wide
variety of bright colours, large motifs and loud patterns, responding to
a demand for a more casual modern kimono that could be worn to a summer
festival.

In the present day, *yukata* are worn with *hanhaba* (half-width) or
*heko* obi, and for women, often accessorised with colour hair
accessories. *Yukata* are always unlined, and it is possible to dress up
a high-end, more subdued *yukata* with a relatively casual *nagoya* obi
- one with a simple dyed design in an informal fabric such as *ro* or
*tsumugi*.

#### *Furisode*

![](Kimono2.jpg "fig:Kimono2.jpg") *[Furisode](Furisode "wikilink")* ()
(lit., "swinging sleeve") kimono are the most formal kimono for a young,
often unmarried, woman. They are decorated with colourful patterns
across the entirety of the garment, and usually worn to *[seijin
shiki](seijin_shiki "wikilink")* (Coming of Age Day) or weddings, either
by the bride herself or an unmarried younger female relative.

The sleeves of the furisode average at between 100–110 cm in length.
*Chu-furisode* (mid-size *furisode*) have shorter sleeves at roughly
80 cm in length; most *chu-furisode* are vintage kimono, as in the
modern day *furisode* are not worn often enough to warrant buying a more
casual form of the dress.

#### *Hōmongi*

*Hōmongi* () literally translates as *visiting wear*. *Hōmongi* are
distinguished in their motif placement - the motifs flow across the back
right shoulder and back right sleeve, the front left shoulder and front
left sleeve, and across the hem, higher at the left than the right. They
are always made of silk, and are more formal than *tsukesage*.

*Hōmongi* are first roughly sewn up, the design sketched onto the
fabric, before it is taken apart to be dyed again. The *hōmongi*'s close
relative, the *tsukesage*, has its patterns dyed on the bolt before
sewing up. This method of production can usually distinguish the two, as
the motifs on a *hōmongi* are likely to cross fluidly over seams in a
way a *tsukesage* generally will not.[29]

*Hōmongi* may be worn by both married and unmarried women; often friends
of the bride will wear *hōmongi* at weddings (except relatives) and
receptions. They may also be worn to formal parties.

#### *Iromuji*

*Iromuji* () (lit. "solid colour") are monochromatic, undecorated kimono
mainly worn to tea ceremonies. The dyed silk may have a flat woven
pattern - *iromuji* suitable for autumn are often made of *rinzu* silk.
Some *edo komon* with incredibly fine patterns may be suitable for tea
ceremony, as from a distance they are visually similar to *iromuji*.
*Iromuji* may occasionally have one *kamon*, though likely no more than
this, and are always made of silk. *Shibori* accessories such as
*obiage* are never worn with *iromuji* if the purpose of wear is a tea
ceremony; instead, flat and untextured silks are chosen for accessories.

#### *Edo komon*

*Edo komon* () is a type of *komon* characterised by an extremely small
repeating pattern, usually done in white on a coloured background. The
*edo komon* dyeing technique originated within the
[samurai](samurai "wikilink") classes during the [Edo
period](Edo_period "wikilink"). *Edo komon* are of a similar formality
to *iromuji*, and *edo komon* with one *kamon* can be worn as
low-formality visiting wear; because of this, they are always made of
silk, unlike regular *komon*.

#### *Mofuku*

*Mofuku* () describes general formal mourning dress, and both men and
women wear *mofuku*. *Mofuku* kimono are plain black silk with five
*kamon*, worn with white undergarments and white *tabi*. Men wear a
kimono of the same kind, with a subdued *obi* and a black-and-white or
black-and-grey striped *hakama*, worn with black or white zōri.

A completely black mourning ensemble for women - a plain black *obi*,
black *obijime* and black *obiage* - is usually reserved for those
closest to the deceased. Those further away will wear kimono in dark and
subdued colours, rather than a plain black kimono with a reduced number
of crests. In time periods when kimono were worn more often, those
closest to the deceased would slowly begin dressing in coloured kimono
over a period of weeks after the death, with the *obijime* being the
last thing to be changed over to colour.

#### *Kurotomesode*

*Kurotomesode* () (black short-sleeve kimono) are formal kimono with a
black background and a design along the hem only, worn to formal events
such as weddings and wedding parties. The design is seen along the hem
only; the further up the body this design reaches, the younger the
wearer is considered to be, though for a very young woman an
*irotomesode* may be chosen instead, *kurotomesode* being considered
somewhat more mature. The design is either symmetrically placed on the
*fuki* and *okumi* portions of the kimono, or asymmetrically placed
along the entirety of the hem, with the design being larger and
higher-placed at the left side than the right. Vintage kimono are more
likely to have the former pattern placement than the latter, though is
not a hard rule.

*Kurotomesode* are always made of silk, and may have a *hiyoku* - a
false lining layer - attached, occasionally with a slightly padded hem.
A *kurotomesode* usually has between 3 and 5 crests; a *kurotomesode* of
any number of crests outranks an *irotomesode* with less than five.
*Kurotomesode*, though formalwear, are not allowed at the royal court,
as black is the colour of mourning, despite the colour designs
decorating the kimono itself; outside of the royal court, this
distinction for *kurotomesode* does not exist. *Kurotomesode* are never
made of flashy silks like *rinzū*, but are instead likely to be a matte
fabric with little texture.

#### *Irotomesode*

*Irotomesode* () (colour short-sleeve kimono) are slightly lower-ranking
formal kimono with roughly the same pattern placement as *kurotomesode*
on a coloured background. *Irotomesode*, though worn to formal events,
may be chosen when a *kurotomesode* would make the wearer appear to be
overdressed for the situation. The pattern placement for *irotomesode*
is roughly identical to *kurotomesode*, though patterns seen along the
*fuki* and *okumi* may drift slightly into the back hem itself.
*Irotomesode* with five *kamon* are of the same formality as any
*kurotomesode*. *Irotomesode* may be made of figured silk such as
*rinzū*.

#### *Tsukesage*

*Tsukesage* () are lower-ranking formalwear, a step below *hōmongi*,
wherein the motifs generally do not cross over the seams of each kimono
panel, but have the same placement as a *hōmongi*. Similarities between
the two often lead to confusion, and indeed, sometimes the two are so
visually similar that the distinction is difficult to make. *Tsukesage*
can have between one and three *kamon*, and can be worn to parties, but
not ceremonies or highly formal events.

#### *Uchikake*

*Uchikake* () are highly formal kimono worn only in bridalwear or on
stage. The name *uchikake* comes from the verb *uchikake-ru*, "to drape
upon", originating in roughly the 16th century from a fashion of the
ruling classes of the time to wear kimono (then called *kosode*, "small
sleeve") unbelted over the shoulders of one's other garments.

*Uchikake* are worn in the same manner in the present day, though unlike
their 16th-century counterparts, could never be worn as an everyday
kimono as well; they are heavily-decorated, highly-formal garments with
thickly-padded hems, designed to trail along the floor as a sort of
coat. Bridal *uchikake* are either red or white, and often decorated
heavily with auspicious motifs. Because they are not designed to be worn
with an *obi*, the designs cover the entirety of the back.

#### *Shiromuku*

![](Wedding_kimono.jpg "fig:Wedding_kimono.jpg") *Shiromuku* () are the
pure-white wedding kimono worn by the bride for a traditional
[Japanese](Marriage_in_Japan "wikilink") [Shinto](Shinto "wikilink")
[wedding ceremony](Wedding_ceremony#Eastern_culture "wikilink").
Comparable to a *[uchikake](#uchikake "wikilink")* and sometimes
described as just a white *uchikake*, a *shiromuku* is worn for the part
of the wedding ceremony, symbolising the purity of the bride coming into
the marriage. The bride may later change into a red *uchikake* after the
ceremony to symbolise good luck.

A *shiromuku* will form part of a bridal ensemble with matching or
coordinating accessories, such as a bridal
[*katsura*](Shimada_(hairstyle) "wikilink"), a set of matching
[kanzashi](kanzashi "wikilink") (usually mock-tortoiseshell), and a
*sensu* fan tucked into the kimono. Due to the expensive nature of
traditional bridal clothing, few are likely to buy brand-new
*shiromuku*; it is not unusual to rent kimono for special occasions, and
Shinto shrines are known to keep and rent out *shiromuku* for
traditional weddings. Those who do possess *shiromuku* already are
likely to have inherited them from close family members.

#### *Susohiki / Hikizuri*

*Susohiki* (lit. "trailing skirt") kimono are extremely long kimono worn
by geisha, actors in kabuki and people performing [traditional Japanese
dance](Buyō "wikilink"). A *susohiki* can be up to 230 cm long, and are
generally no shorter than 200 cm from shoulder to hem; this is to allow
the kimono to literally trail along the floor.

*Susohiki*, apart from their extreme length, are also sewn slightly
differently to normal kimono, due to the way they are worn.[30] The
collar on a *susohiki* is sewn further and deeper back into the nape of
the neck, so that it can be pulled down much lower without causing the
front of the kimono to ride up. The sleeves are set unevenly onto the
body, shorter at the back than at the front, so that the underarm does
not show when the collar is set this low.

*Susohiki* are also tied differently when they are put on - whereas
regular kimono are tied with a visible *ohashori*, and the side seams
kept straight, *susohiki* are pulled up somewhat diagonally, to
emphasise the hips and ensure the kimono trails nicely on the floor. A
small *ohashori* is tied, larger at the back than the front, but it
wrapped against the body with a red *momi* wrap, which is then covered
by the *obi*, rendering it not visible.

#### *[Jūnihitoe](Jūnihitoe "wikilink")*

![](Junihitoe.jpg "fig:Junihitoe.jpg") *Jūnihitoe* () (lit. "twelve
layers") describes the layered garments worn by [court
ladies](Lady-in-waiting#Japan "wikilink") during the [Heian
period](Heian_period "wikilink"). The *jūnihitoe* consisted of up to
twelve layered garments, with the innermost garment being the *kosode* -
the small-sleeved kimono prototype which would eventually go on to
become the outermost garment worn.

The total weight of the *jūnihitoe* could be up to 20 kg. The garments
were decorated in relatively large motifs, with a more important aspect
being the numerous recorded colour combinations an outfit could have.

An important accessory of this outfit was an elaborate [hand
fan](Hand_fan#Japanese_hand_fan "wikilink"), which could be tied
together by tassels tied onto the end fan bones. These fans were made of
cypress wood entirely, with the design painted onto the wide, flat bones
themselves, and were known as *hiōugi*.

No garments from the Heian period survive, and today the *jūnihitoe* can
only be seen as a reproduction in museums, movies, festivals and
demonstrations. The [Imperial
Household](Imperial_House_of_Japan "wikilink") still officially uses
them at some important functions, such as the coronation of the new
Empress.

### Men's kimono

![](Shinto_married_couple.jpg "Shinto_married_couple.jpg")

In contrast to women's kimono, men's kimono outfits are far simpler,
typically consisting of five pieces, not including footwear.

Men's kimono sleeves are attached to the body of the kimono with no more
than a few inches unattached at the bottom, unlike the women's style of
very deep sleeves mostly unattached from the body of the kimono. Men's
sleeves are less deep than women's kimono sleeves to accommodate the obi
around the waist beneath them, whereas on a woman's kimono, the long,
unattached bottom of the sleeve can hang over the obi without getting in
the way.
![](Armored_Samurai_with_Jin-Haori.jpg "fig:Armored_Samurai_with_Jin-Haori.jpg")
In the modern era, the principal distinctions between men's kimono are
in the fabric. The typical men's kimono is a subdued, dark color; black,
dark blues, greens, and browns are common. Fabrics are usually matte.
Some have a subtle pattern, and textured fabrics are common in more
casual kimono. More casual kimono may be made in slightly brighter
colors, such as lighter purples, greens and blues. Sumo wrestlers have
occasionally been known to wear quite bright colors such as fuchsia.

The most formal style of kimono is plain black silk with five *kamon* on
the chest, shoulders and back. Slightly less formal is the three-*kamon*
kimono.

## Accessories and related garments

Though the kimono is the national dress of Japan, there are many
variations on it, some for traditional occasions, and others that
co-existed alongside kimono as a separate style of dress. There are also
a number of accessories that can be or are worn with kimono, and these
vary in occasion and usage as well.

Some accessories and garments are specific to certain religious roles.
The are worn only by *[Kannushi](Kannushi "wikilink")* and
*[Miko](Miko "wikilink")* in some [Shinto
shrine](Shinto_shrine "wikilink") ceremonies, and the is the everyday
clothing for a male [Zen Buddhist](Zen "wikilink") lay-monk, and the
favoured garment for *[Komusō](Komusō "wikilink")* monks playing the
*[shakuhachi](shakuhachi "wikilink")*.

Others are related to traditional art forms in Japan. The is worn by men
in some tea ceremonies, and both [geisha](Geisha#Appearance "wikilink")
and [maiko](Maiko#Appearance "wikilink") wear various accessories and
types of kimono not found in everyday dress.

There are also accessories and garments only worn for certain holidays
and occasions; *[okobo](okobo "wikilink")*, also known as *pokkuri*, are
worn by children for the *[shichi-go-san](shichi-go-san "wikilink")*
ceremony and by young women on *[seijin no
hi](seijin_no_hi "wikilink")*. Brides opting for a traditional ceremony
will wear [specific accessories and types of
kimono](Kimono#Bridalwear "wikilink") for certain parts of the ceremony.
For formal ceremonies, members of Japanese nobility will wear certain
types of antiquated kimono such as the and the .

Accessories such as *[kanzashi](kanzashi "wikilink")* and
*[obijime](obijime "wikilink")* may be worn to any occasion and
ceremony, though the style of these accessories changes based on
formality, and, in the case of maiko, season.

![](Datejime.png "Datejime.png")

 : A wide undersash used to tie the *nagajuban* and the outer *kimono* and hold them in place.

<!-- -->

: A [fur](Hide_(skin) "wikilink") [collar](collar_(clothing) "wikilink"), [boa](Feather_boa "wikilink") or [stole](Shawl#Stole "wikilink") (usually white) worn by women over a *kimono*; usually on *furisode* by young women out celebrating their *[Coming of Age](Coming_of_Age_Day "wikilink")* at shrines, etc.

<!-- -->

: Wooden sandals worn by men and women with *[yukata](yukata "wikilink")*. One unique style is worn solely by [geisha](geisha "wikilink") (see *okobo* below). There are also *Hiyori geta / Masa geta*, *Taka-ashida geta*, *Ippon geta / Tengu geta*, *Pokkuri geta*.

<!-- -->

: Traditional Japanese stylized [headband](headband "wikilink"), worn to keep sweat off of one's face, and as a symbol of effort or courage by the wearer, especially by those in the military.

![](Mariko's_Graduation_'96.jpg "Mariko's_Graduation_'96.jpg")

: A divided (*umanori-bakama*) or undivided skirt (*andon-bakama*) which resembles a wide pair of trousers, traditionally worn by men but contemporarily also by women in less formal situations. A *hakama* typically is pleated and fastened by ribbons, tied around the waist over the obi. Men's *hakama* also have a *koshi ita*, which is a stiff or padded part in the lower back of the wearer. Hakama are worn in several [budo](Budō "wikilink") arts such as [aikido](aikido "wikilink"), [kendo](kendo "wikilink"), [iaidō](iaidō "wikilink") and [naginata](naginata "wikilink"). Hakama are often worn by women at college graduation ceremonies, and by [Miko](Miko "wikilink") on shinto shrines. Depending on the pattern and material, hakama can range from very formal to visiting wear.

<!-- -->

: A pair of boots (leather or faux leather), with low-to-mid heels, worn with a pair of *hakama* (a pair of traditional Japanese trousers); boots are a style of footwear that came in from the West during the [Meiji Era](Meiji_(era) "wikilink"); worn by women while wearing a *hakama*, optional footwear worn by young women, students and teachers at high-school and university graduation ceremonies, and by young women out celebrating their *[Coming of Age](Coming_of_Age_Day "wikilink")* at shrines, etc., often with a *hakama* with *furisode* combination.

<!-- -->

: A small box-shaped [billfold](billfold "wikilink") accessory; sometimes covered in materials to coordinate with the wearer's *kimono* or *obi*. Fastened closed with a cord, and carried tucked-within a person's *futokoro*, the space within the front of *kimono* collar and above the *obi*. Used for formal occasions that require traditional dress, such as a traditional Shinto wedding or a child's *[Shichi-Go-San](Shichi-Go-San "wikilink")* ceremony. Originally used for practical uses, such as carrying around a woman's *beni ita* ([lipstick](lipstick "wikilink")), *omamori* (an amulet/talisman), *kagami* (mirror), *tenugui* (handkerchief), coins, and the like, it now has a more of a decorative role.

<!-- -->

: The worker's version of the more formal *haori*. As winterwear, it is often padded for warmth, giving it insulating properties, as opposed to the somewhat lighter *happi*. It could be worn outside in the wintertime by fieldworkers out working in the fields, by people at home as a [housecoat](housecoat "wikilink") or a [cardigan](Cardigan_(sweater) "wikilink"), and even slept-in over one's bedclothes.

![](黒平絹地富士図羽織_男物-Man's_Formal_Jacket_(Haori)_MET_DP330781.jpg "黒平絹地富士図羽織_男物-Man's_Formal_Jacket_(Haori)_MET_DP330781.jpg")

: A hip- or thigh-length kimono-like [overcoat](overcoat "wikilink") of varied length, which adds formality to an outfit. Haori were originally worn only by men, until it became a fashion for women in the [Meiji period](Meiji_period "wikilink"). They are now worn by both men and women. The  was specifically made for armoured samurai to wear.

<!-- -->

: A tasseled, woven string fastener for *haori*. The most formal color is white (see also *fusa* above).

<!-- -->

: A type of *haori* traditionally worn by shop keepers, sometimes uniform between the helpers of a shop (not unlike a [propaganda kimono](propaganda_kimono "wikilink"), but for advertising business), and is now associated mostly with festivals.

<!-- -->

: Are items of Japanese clothing that cover the stomach. They are worn for health, fashion and superstitious reasons.

<!-- -->

: Originally a kind of padded over-kimono for warmth, this has evolved into a sleeveless over-kimono like a padded outer [vest](vest "wikilink") or [pinafore](pinafore "wikilink") (also similar to a [sweater vest](sweater_vest "wikilink") or [gilet](gilet "wikilink")), worn primarily by girls on formal outings such as the *[Shichi-Go-San](Shichi-Go-San "wikilink")* (literally "seven-five-three") ceremony for children aged seven, five, and three.

<!-- -->

: A modification of the usual split-toe *tabi* sock design for use as a *shoe*, complete with rubber sole. Invented in the early 20th century.

<!-- -->

: Traditional Japanese loose-woven two-piece clothing, consisting of a robe-like top and [shorts](shorts "wikilink") below the waist. Worn by men, women, boys, girls, and even babies, during the hot, humid summer season, in lieu of *kimono*.

<!-- -->

 : A thin garment similar to an [undershirt](undershirt "wikilink"). It is worn under the nagajuban.[31][32]

<!-- -->

: A type of gown-like [apron](apron "wikilink"); first designed to protect kimono from food stains, it has baggy sleeves, is as long as the wearer's knees, and fastens with strips of cloth ties that are tied at the back of the neck and the waist. Particularly used when cooking and cleaning, it is worn by Japanese [housewives](housewife "wikilink"), [lunch ladies](Lunch_lady "wikilink"), cleaners, etc.

<!-- -->

: A traditional Japanese [oil-paper](Washi "wikilink") [umbrella](umbrella "wikilink")/[parasol](parasol "wikilink"), ideal as an outdoor accessory, come rain or shine. See also [Gifu umbrellas](Gifu_umbrellas "wikilink").

<!-- -->

: A traditional Japanese [drawstring](drawstring "wikilink") [bag](bag "wikilink") or pouch, worn like a [purse](Coin_purse "wikilink") or [handbag](handbag "wikilink") (vaguely similar to the English [reticule](Reticule_(handbag) "wikilink")), for carrying around personal possessions ([money](money "wikilink"), etc.). A kind of *sagemono* (see below).

<!-- -->

:[33] The susoyoke and hadajuban combined into a one-piece garment.[34][35]

<!-- -->

: A narrow sash used to aid in dressing up, often made of silk or wool. They are used to hold virtually anything (i.e. a yukata) in place during the process of dressing up, and can be used in many ways depending on what is worn.

<!-- -->

: A traditional Japanese [overcoat](overcoat "wikilink") (not to be confused with a *[haori](haori "wikilink")* or a *[hifu](hifu "wikilink")*), characterised with a signature square neckline (for showing-off the multiple-collars of the *kimono* worn beneath), and for duel-fastenings (either tie, [snap](Snap_fastener "wikilink") or [button](button "wikilink") closures). It is worn over the *kimono* for warmth and protection while outdoors on day-outings and long-distance journeys, as a casual [housecoat](housecoat "wikilink") or [coatdress](coatdress "wikilink") in winter, and as an artist's work [smock](Smock-frock "wikilink"), [apron](apron "wikilink"), [pinafore](pinafore "wikilink"), [overalls](overall "wikilink") or a [tunic](tunic "wikilink")), perfect for art-studio and garden tasks. Some *michiyuki* will include a hidden [pocket](pocket "wikilink") beneath the front panel. Although historically there are versions for men, most modern *michiyuki* are made for women. There is no standard length, and some can be as long as the *kimono*-itself worn beneath it, which is more common for the style of *michiyuki* that are designed as [rainwear](rainwear "wikilink").

<!-- -->

: A long under-*kimono* worn by both men and women beneath the main outer garment.[36] Since silk kimono are delicate and difficult to clean, the *nagajuban* helps to keep the outer kimono clean by preventing contact with the wearer's skin. Only the collar edge of the nagajuban shows from beneath the outer kimono.[37] Many *nagajuban* have removable collars, to allow them to be changed to match the outer garment, and to be easily washed without washing the entire garment. They are often as beautifully ornate and patterned as the outer kimono. Since men's kimono are usually fairly subdued in pattern and color, the *nagajuban* allows for discreetly wearing very striking designs and colours.[38] Often worn over a *hadajuban* (see above).

<!-- -->

: Japanese [nightclothes](nightclothes "wikilink").

![](Kimono_backshot_by_sth.jpg "Kimono_backshot_by_sth.jpg")

 : An ornament worn suspended from the men's *obi*, serving as a [cordlock](Cord_lock "wikilink") or a [counterweight](counterweight "wikilink"). (See also *ojime*, below).

<!-- -->

: The scarf-like sash, often silk, which is knotted and tied above the obi and tucked into the top of the *obi*, to hide the *obi-makura*. Worn with the more formal varieties of kimono, and serves as decorates the top part of an *obi* belt; there are many types and designs: *shibori*, embroidered, etc.; although you can only see a little bit of it, it has an important role as a decoration, and there are different styles of tucking it in and is often more visible with furisode kimono. Used for tying more complex bows with the *obi*.

<!-- -->

: A decorative fastening accessory piece, strung onto the *obijime*.

<!-- -->

: A thin stiff board that goes over the *datejime* and helps keep an *obi* in place and prevent it from getting wrinkled. It is worn underneath the second layer of the *obi*, after wrapping around the body twice. Modern versions have an elastic band or string, so it can be put on before the *obi*.

<!-- -->

: The colourful, decorative ropes, cords or strings, used to assist in tying more complex bows with the *obi* and hold an *obi* belt in place and helps it keep its shape; also serves as a decoration around the *obi* belt. It ties in a knot in the front in the middle of the obi, and the ends are tucked into the sides of itself. An *ojime* (see below) was used to fasten the *obijime* in place (similar to a *netsuke*), and also serves as a decoration.

<!-- -->

: Padding used to put volume under the *obi* knot (*musubi*); to support the bows or ties at the back of the *obi* and keep them lifted. It's essential for placing the common *Taiko* knot high on the back. *Obimakura* is usually covered by the *obiage* to hide it and make the entire tie more presentable.

<!-- -->

: A type of [bead](bead "wikilink") which originated in Japan, and were used to fasten a *obijime* in place, like a cordlock. They were also worn between the *inrō* and *netsuke* and are typically under an inch in length. Each is carved into a particular shape and image, similar to the *netsuke* cordlock, though smaller. Similar to a *netsuke* (see above).

<!-- -->

: A [handheld fan](Hand_fan "wikilink") (either an  or an ), generally of [thick paper](Washi "wikilink") coated in paint, [lacquer](lacquer "wikilink") or [gold leaf](gold_leaf "wikilink"), with wooden spines, often lacquered. As well as being used for cooling-off, *sensu* fans are used as dancing props and to maintain makeup and are kept in the folds of the *obi*.

<!-- -->

: A flat, thick-bottomed sandal made of bamboo and straw with leather soles, and with metal spikes protruding from the heel of the sole to prevent slipping on ice.

<!-- -->

: A thin [half-slip](Slip_(clothing) "wikilink")-like piece of underwear, like a [petticoat](petticoat "wikilink"), worn by women under their *nagajuban*.[39][40]

<!-- -->

: A round, hollow Japanese Shinto [bell](bell "wikilink") or chime, that contains pellets that sound when agitated. They are somewhat like a [jingle bell](jingle_bell "wikilink") in form, though the materials produce a coarse, rolling sound. Suzu come in many sizes, ranging from tiny ones on good luck charms (called omamori (お守り)) to large ones at shrine entrances. As an accessory to *kimono* wear, *suzu* are often part of *kanzashi*.

<!-- -->

: Ankle-high, divided-toe [socks](sock "wikilink") usually worn with *[zōri](zōri "wikilink")* or *[geta](geta_(footwear) "wikilink")*. There also exist sturdier, [boot-like](boot "wikilink") *jikatabi*, which are used for example to fieldwork.

<!-- -->

: A pair sashes made from either cloth or cord that loops over each shoulder and crosses over the wearer's back, used for holding up the long sleeves of the Japanese kimono; the bottom of the kimono sleeves can then be tucked into the loop, so that they don't hang so low.

<!-- -->

: A handy piece of fabric, usually [cotton](cotton "wikilink") or [linen](linen "wikilink"), they can come in a wide variety of colours and patterns, and with a myriad amount of uses—but mostly as a [handkerchief](handkerchief "wikilink"), a [hand towel](hand_towel "wikilink"), and larger ones can even serve as a [napkin](napkin "wikilink"), [bib](Bib_(garment) "wikilink"), [headscarf](headscarf "wikilink")/[kerchief](kerchief "wikilink")/[bandana](bandana "wikilink") (or to ad-lib as a *[hachimaki](hachimaki "wikilink")*), and can double as a *[furoshiki](furoshiki "wikilink")* (a traditional Japanese wrapping cloth), and even a [shawl](shawl "wikilink") or a [baby sling](baby_sling "wikilink").

<!-- -->

: Japanese slippers worn indoors at home, school or certain companies and public buildings where street shoes are prohibited.

<!-- -->

: Traditional sandals made of straw rope and bamboo bark and designed to wrap securely around the wearer's foot and up around the ankle; mostly worn by [monks](monk "wikilink"), and others who often travelled long-distance by foot (traders and [merchants](merchant "wikilink"), etc.).

<!-- -->

: The traditional Japanese [undergarment](undergarment "wikilink") (like a [loincloth](loincloth "wikilink") or [perizoma](Perizoma_(loincloth) "wikilink")) for adult females; it may also be worn as a kimono underskirt, and as a single-layer absorbent [bathrobe](bathrobe "wikilink") (worn during or after a bath).

![](Zoori_straw.png "Zoori_straw.png")

: Traditional sandals worn by both men and women, similar in design to [flip-flops](flip-flops "wikilink"). Their formality ranges from strictly informal to fully formal. They are made of many materials, including cloth, leather, vinyl and woven grass, and can be highly decorated or very simple.

### Layering

Pre-WW2, kimono were commonly worn layered, with three being the
standard number of layers worn over the top of undergarments. The
layered kimono underneath were known as *dōnuki*, and were often a
patchwork of older or unwearable kimono taken apart for their fabric.

In modern-day Japan, layered kimono are only seen on the stage, whether
for classical dances or in kabuki. A false second layer called a may be
attached instead of an entirely separate kimono to achieve this look; it
is a type of floating lining, sewn to the kimono only along the centre
back and underneath the collar.

This effect allows it to show at the collar and the hem, and in some
kabuki performances such as *[Fuji Musume](Fuji_Musume "wikilink")*, the
kimono will be worn with the *okumi* flipped back slightly underneath
the obi to expose the design on the *hiyoku*. The *hiyoku* can also be
seen on some bridal kimono.

## Care

![](Kimonofold.jpg "fig:Kimonofold.jpg") In the past, a kimono would
often be entirely taken apart for washing, and then re-sewn for
wearing.[41] This traditional washing method is called *arai hari*.
Because the stitches must be taken out for washing, traditional kimono
need to be hand sewn. *Arai hari* is very expensive and difficult and is
one of the causes of the declining popularity of kimono. Modern fabrics
and cleaning methods have been developed that eliminate this need,
although the traditional washing of kimono is still practiced,
especially for high-end garments.

New, custom-made kimono are generally delivered to a customer with long,
loose [basting](Tack_(sewing) "wikilink") stitches placed around the
outside edges. These stitches are called *shitsuke ito*. They are
sometimes replaced for storage. They help to prevent bunching, folding
and wrinkling, and keep the kimono's layers in alignment.

Like many other traditional Japanese garments, there are specific ways
to fold kimono. These methods help to preserve the garment and to keep
it from creasing when stored. Kimono are often stored wrapped in paper
called *tatōshi*.

Kimono need to be aired out at least seasonally and before and after
each time they are worn. Many people prefer to have their kimono [dry
cleaned](dry_cleaning "wikilink"). Although this can be extremely
expensive, it is generally less expensive than *arai hari* but may be
impossible for certain fabrics or dyes.

## Commercial Appropriation

In June 2019, [Kim Kardashian West](Kim_Kardashian "wikilink") launched
a new range of shapewear called Kimono. West was heavily criticised over
the name of the brand which critics argued disrespected Japanese culture
and ignored the significance behind the traditional outfit. Following
the launch of the range, the hashtag #KimOhNo began trending on
[Twitter](Twitter "wikilink") and the mayor of [Kyoto](Kyoto "wikilink")
wrote to West to ask her to reconsider the trademark on Kimono. A
Change.org petition was also created, which immediately began to receive
global support. In response to public pressure, in July 2019, West
announced that she would change the name.[42] However, as of August 4,
2019, the trademark filings remain active.

## Notes

## References

## Further reading

-

## External links

-   [The Canadian Museum of Civilization – Landscape Kimonos of Itchiku
    Kubota](http://www.civilization.ca/cmc/exhibitions/cultur/kimonos/kimoneng.shtml)
-   [Tokyo National
    Museum](https://web.archive.org/web/20041205120141/http://www.tnm.go.jp/en/)
    Look for "textiles" under "decorative arts".
-   [Kyoto National Museum:
    Textiles](http://www.kyohaku.go.jp/eng/syuzou/meihin/senshoku/index.html)
-   [The Costume Museum: Costume History in
    Japan](http://www.iz2.or.jp/english/index.htm)
-   [Kimono Fraise; includes directions on how to put on a
    kimono](http://kimono.fraise.net)
-   [Immortal Geisha Forums; Comprehensive Resource on Vintage and
    Modern Kimono
    Culture](https://web.archive.org/web/20120324224115/http://immortalgeisha.com/ig_bb/)
-   [Vintage Kimonos from the MEIJI, TAISHŌ & SHŌWA
    period.](https://www.oldkimonos.com/)
-   [Love Kimono!; A lot of knowledge of kimono with
    pictures.](http://lovekimono.googlepages.com)

### Craft materials

-

-

[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Japanese
clothing](Category:Japanese_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Robes and
cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink") [Category:Folk
costumes](Category:Folk_costumes "wikilink") [Category:History of Asian
clothing](Category:History_of_Asian_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] .

[5] .

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10] 1871(明治5)年11月12日太政官布告399号

[11] [1](http://www.east-asian-history.net/textbooks/MJ/ch4_main.htm)

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31] Yamanaka, Norio (1982). *The Book of Kimono*. Tokyo; New York:
Kodansha International, p. 60. (USA), (Japan).

[32] [Underwear (Hadagi):
Hada-Juban](http://kidorakujapan.com/wear/women_under_hadajuban.html).
KIDORAKU Japan. Accessed 22 October 2009.

[33] [A search for
"着物スリップ"](http://esearch.rakuten.co.jp/rms/sd/esearch/vc?sv=2&sitem=%C3%E5%CA%AA%A5%B9%A5%EA%A5%C3%A5%D7).
[Rakuten](Rakuten "wikilink"). Accessed 22 October 2009.

[34] Yamanaka, Norio (1982). *The Book of Kimono*. Tokyo; New York:
Kodansha International, p. 76. (USA), (Japan).

[35] [Underwear (Hadagi): Kimono
Slip](http://kidorakujapan.com/wear/women_under_kimonoslip.html).
KIDORAKU Japan. Accessed 22 October 2009.

[36] Yamanaka, Norio (1982). *The Book of Kimono*. Tokyo; New York:
Kodansha International, p. 61. (USA), (Japan).

[37] [Nagajuban](http://kimono.sighvogue.com/nagajuban-under-kimono-garment.html)
undergarment for Japanese kimono

[38] Imperatore, Cheryl, & MacLardy, Paul (2001). *Kimono Vanishing
Tradition: Japanese Textiles of the 20th Century.* Atglen, Penn.:
Schiffer Publishing. Chap. 3 "Nagajuban—Undergarments", pp. 32–46. . .

[39]

[40] [Underwear (Hadagi):
Susoyoke](http://kidorakujapan.com/wear/women_under_susoyoke.html).
KIDORAKU Japan. Accessed 22 October 2009.

[41]

[42]