![](Raima_Sen_still3.jpg "fig:Raima_Sen_still3.jpg") in a
[lehenga](lehenga "wikilink")-style saree\]\] A **lehenga-style saree**
is a modern garment introduced in [India](India "wikilink") that blends
elements of the traditional [saree](saree "wikilink") and [lehenga
choli](lehenga_choli "wikilink"). A lehenga-style saree is normally to
long. To wear one, unlike a sari, one does not have to form pleats but
may simply tuck and drape.

Like that of a traditional saree, the lehenga-style saree is worn over a
[petticoat](petticoat "wikilink") (inskirt; *pavadai* or *langa* in the
south, and *shaya* in eastern India, Lehenga in western India), along
with a [blouse](blouse "wikilink") called the choli, which is the upper
garment. The style[1] of [choli](choli "wikilink") mostly resembles that
of the choli of a conventional lehenga or [ghagra
choli](ghagra_choli "wikilink"). Sometimes conventional blouses are also
matched with lehenga-style saree. The choli is mostly of a halter neck
style, deep neck, or backless style. As with choli worn with the saree,
these cholis are also embellished with [kundan](kundan "wikilink"),
beads, mirrors, etc.

## Origin

Lehenga-style saree is stitched as a long flared
[skirt](skirt "wikilink") with a zip at the side and made to the
measurements of the wearer. The wearer need only fasten the zipper and
drape the pallu (the loose end) over the shoulders. This requires less
technical skill in draping and pleating than the regular saree demands.
The pallu has the dramatic effect of the matching
[dupatta](dupatta "wikilink") of the conventional [lehenga
choli](Gagra_choli "wikilink").

## Embroidery and embellishments

Various types of embroidery patterns are used for a lehenga-style saree.
Bagh, [chikan](Chikan_(embroidery) "wikilink"), kashida,
[kasuti](kasuti "wikilink"), kantha, sozni, shisha, and
[zardozi](zardozi "wikilink") are some of the commonly practiced types
of embroidery in the lehenga-style saree.

Bagh is a special kind of embroidery done by women in Punjab to be worn
during festivals and weddings. Bagh embroidery completely hides the base
fabric and is a very heavy kind of embroidery.
[Kashida](Kashida "wikilink") is a Kashmiri embroidery type. This is
very colorful and depicts Kashmir in its patterns. The other most famous
embroidery on lehenga-style sarees is the [kantha](kantha "wikilink")
work and kasuti work of Bangalore.

Embellishments used in lehenga-style sarees' patterns include silver
embroidery, golden embroidery, metal beads, real pearls, wood beads,
glass beads, mirror work, lace work, Kundan, sequins, glittering stones,
and zardozi. Mostly rich fabrics like [silk](silk "wikilink"),
[georgette](georgette_(fabric) "wikilink"), brasso, brocade,
[chiffon](chiffon_(fabric) "wikilink"), crepe, etc., are used in the
making of a lehenga-style saree.

## Indian draping a lehenga-style saree

Compared with traditional sarees, the method of draping[2][3] a lehenga
style is relatively simple and hassle-free. The plain end of the saree
is tucked into the petticoat/inskirt and wrapped once completely around
the waist, similar to wearing a regular saree. Whereas pleats would be
formed in a traditional saree, at this point with the lehenga style one
continues to tuck in the drape without making any pleats. (In a
lehenga-style saree, pleats are replaced with embellished gotas or
[panels](wikt:panel "wikilink") at the front, which imparts a flared
[silhouette](silhouette "wikilink") that is characteristic of a
lehenga-style saree.) Finally, the pallu is draped over the shoulder
like a regular saree.

The only difference between a lehenga-style saree and a regular saree is
that the lehenga-style saree does not require pleats to be formed at the
front. A few lehenga-style sarees come with side hooks to fit the saree
snugly around the [waist](waist "wikilink").

## References

[Category:Bangladeshi
clothing](Category:Bangladeshi_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Indian
clothing](Category:Indian_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Pakistani
clothing](Category:Pakistani_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Saris](Category:Saris "wikilink")

[1] Mohapatra, R. P. (1992) "Fashion styles of ancient India", B. R.
Publishing corporation,

[2]

[3] Boulanger, C (1997) Saris: An Illustrated Guide to the Indian Art of
Draping, Shakti Press International, New York.