Moo moo}}
![](Festal_Hawaiian_dancers_02.jpg "fig:Festal_Hawaiian_dancers_02.jpg")\|300x300px\]\]
The **muumuu** or **muumuu** () is a loose dress of
[Hawaiian](Hawaii "wikilink") origin[1] that hangs from the shoulder and
is like a cross between a shirt and a robe. Like the [aloha
shirt](aloha_shirt "wikilink"), muumuu exports are often brilliantly
colored with floral patterns of generic
[Polynesian](Polynesian_culture "wikilink") motifs. Muumuus for local
Hawaiian residents are more subdued in tone. Muumuus are no longer as
widely worn at work as the aloha shirt, but continue to be the preferred
formal dress for weddings and festivals such as the [Merrie
Monarch](Merrie_Monarch_Festival "wikilink") hula competition. Muumuus
are also popular as [maternity](maternity "wikilink") wear because they
do not restrict the waist.

## Etymology and history

The word *muumuu* means "cut off" in Hawaiian, because the dress
originally lacked a [yoke](Yoke_(clothing) "wikilink").[2] Originally it
was a shorter, informal version of the more formal *holokū*. *Holokū*
was the original name for the [Mother Hubbard
dress](Mother_Hubbard_dress "wikilink") introduced by
[Protestant](Protestant "wikilink") missionaries to Hawaii in the
1820s.[3] The *holokū* featured long sleeves and a floor-length unfitted
dress falling from a high-necked yoke. Over the years, the *holokū*
approximated more closely to European and American fashions. It might
have a fitted waist, and even a train for evening. As the *holokū*
became more elaborate, the muumuu, a shortened version, became popular
for informal wear.

## References

## External links

-

-   [Housedress (muumuu), 1970s, in the Staten Island Historical Society
    Online Collections
    Database](https://statenisland.pastperfectonline.com/webobject/1F3224AA-2FE8-4EF3-8733-401245381533)

[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:History of
Oceanian clothing](Category:History_of_Oceanian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Polynesian folk
clothing](Category:Polynesian_folk_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Symbols of Hawaii](Category:Symbols_of_Hawaii "wikilink")
[Category:Hawaiian words and
phrases](Category:Hawaiian_words_and_phrases "wikilink")

[1] Gary Luke and Susan R. Quinn, [*Americanisms: The Illustrated Book
of Words Made in the
USA*](https://books.google.com/books?id=7904pbwUF14C&pg=PT110#v=onepage&q&f=false)
(Sasquatch Books, 2003).

[2]

[3]