![](Petticoat_MET_50.10.17_CP4.jpg "fig:Petticoat_MET_50.10.17_CP4.jpg")
![](Whiteandpinkpetticoat.jpg "fig:Whiteandpinkpetticoat.jpg")

A **petticoat** or **underskirt** is an article of
[clothing](clothing "wikilink"), a type of
[undergarment](undergarment "wikilink") worn under a
[skirt](skirt "wikilink") or a [dress](dress "wikilink"). Its precise
meaning varies over centuries and between countries.

According to the *[Oxford English
Dictionary](Oxford_English_Dictionary "wikilink")*, in current [British
English](British_English "wikilink"), a petticoat is "a light loose
undergarment ... hanging from the shoulders or waist". In modern
[American usage](American_English "wikilink"), "petticoat" refers only
to a garment hanging from the waist, a [half
slip](Slip_(clothing) "wikilink"). In historical contexts (sixteenth to
mid-nineteenth centuries), *petticoat* refers to any separate skirt worn
with a [gown](gown "wikilink"), [bedgown](bedgown "wikilink"),
[bodice](bodice "wikilink") or [jacket](jacket "wikilink"); these
petticoats are not, strictly speaking, underwear, as they were made to
be seen. In both historical and modern contexts, *petticoat* refers to
skirt-like undergarments worn for warmth or to give the skirt or dress
the desired fashionable shape.

*Petticoat* is the standard name in English for any underskirt worn as
part of non-Western clothing such as the *[lehenga](lehenga "wikilink")*
with the [sari](sari "wikilink").

## Terminology

Sometimes a petticoat may be called a *waist slip* or *underskirt* (UK)
or *[half slip](Slip_(clothing) "wikilink")* (US), with *petticoat*
restricted to extremely full garments. A [chemise](chemise "wikilink")
hangs from the shoulders.*Petticoat* can also refer to a [full-length
slip](Slip_(clothing) "wikilink") in the UK,[1] although this usage is
somewhat old-fashioned.

## History

![](Woman's_Petticoat_LACMA_M.63.55.3.jpg "fig:Woman's_Petticoat_LACMA_M.63.55.3.jpg")
In the fourteenth century, both men and women wore undercoats called
"petticotes".[2] The word "petticoat" came from *pety coote*, meaning "a
small coat".[3][4] Petticoats are also sometimes spelled "petty coat".
The original petticoat was meant to be seen and was worn with an open
gown.[5] The practice of wearing petticoats as undergarments was well
established in England by 1585. In French, petticoats were called
*jupe.* The *basquina*, worn in [Spain](Spain "wikilink"), was
considered a type of petticoat.[6]

In the 18th century in Europe and in America, petticoats were considered
a part of the exterior garment and were meant to be seen. An
underpetticoat was considered an undergarment and was shorter than a
regular petticoat. Underpetticoats were also known as a *dickey*.[7]
Also in the [American colonies](Thirteen_Colonies "wikilink"), working
women wore shortgowns ([bedgowns](bedgown "wikilink")) over petticoats
that normally matched in color. The hem length of a petticoat in the
18th century depended on what was fashionable in dress at the time.
Often, petticoats had slits or holes for women to reach pockets inside.
Petticoats were worn by all classes of women throughout the 18th
century. The style known as [polonaise](Polonaise_(clothing) "wikilink")
revealed much of the petticoat intentionally.[8]

In the early 19th century, dresses became narrower and simpler with much
less lingerie, including "invisible petticoats". Then, as the waltz
became popular in the 1820s, full-skirted gowns with petticoats were
revived in Europe and the United States. In the [Victorian
era](Victorian_era "wikilink"), petticoats were used to give bulk and
shape to the skirts worn over the petticoat.[9] By the mid 19th century,
petticoats were worn over [hoops](Hoopskirt "wikilink").[10] As the
[bustle](bustle "wikilink") became popular, petticoats developed
flounces towards the back. In the 1870s, petticoats were worn in layers.
Colored petticoats came into fashion by the 1890s.

In the early 20th century, petticoats were circular, had flounces and
buttons in which women could attach additional flounces to the
garment.[11] [Bloomers](Bloomers_(clothing) "wikilink") were also touted
as a replacement for petticoats when working and by fashion
reformers.[12]

After [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink"), silk petticoats were in
fashion.[13]

Petticoats were revived by [Christian Dior](Christian_Dior "wikilink")
in his full-skirted "[New
Look](Christian_Dior_S.A.#The_"New_Look" "wikilink")" of 1947 and
tiered, [ruffled](ruffled "wikilink"), stiffened petticoats remained
extremely popular during the 1950s and 1960s.[14] These were sold in a
few clothing stores as late as 1970.

## Asian petticoats

It is the main undergarment worn with a [sari](sari "wikilink"). Sari
petticoats usually match the color of the sari and are made of satin or
cotton.[15] Notable differences between the western petticoat and sari
petticoat include that the latter is rarely shorter than ankle length
and is always worn from the waist down. In India, it is also called
inner skirt[16] or an inskirt.

## In popular culture

The early feminist [Mary Wollstonecraft](Mary_Wollstonecraft "wikilink")
was famously disparaged by [Horace Walpole](Horace_Walpole "wikilink")
as a "hyena in petticoats".[17] [Florentia
Sale](Florentia_Sale "wikilink") was dubbed "the
[Grenadier](Grenadier "wikilink") in Petticoats"[18] for travelling with
her military husband [Sir Robert Henry
Sale](Robert_Henry_Sale "wikilink") around the [British
Empire](British_Empire "wikilink").

The phrase "petticoat government" has referred to women running
government or domestic affairs.[19] The phrase is usually applied in a
positive tone welcoming female governance of society and home, but
occasionally is used to imply a threat to appropriate government by
males, as was mentioned in several of [Henry
Fielding](Henry_Fielding "wikilink")'s plays.[20] An Irish pamphlet
*Petticoat Government, Exemplified in a Late Case in Ireland* was
published in 1780. The American writer [Washington
Irving](Washington_Irving "wikilink") used the phrase in his [Rip Van
Winkle](Rip_Van_Winkle "wikilink") (1819) [21] [Frances
Trollope](Frances_Trollope "wikilink") wrote *Petticoat Government: A
Novel* in 1850.[22] [Emma Orczy](Emma_Orczy "wikilink") wrote
*[Petticoat Government](Petticoat_Government "wikilink")*, another
novel, in 1911. [G. K. Chesterton](G._K._Chesterton "wikilink")
(1874–1936) mentions petticoat in a positive manner; to the idea of
female dignity and power in his book, *What's Wrong With the World,*
(1910) he states:

United States President [Andrew Jackson](Andrew_Jackson "wikilink")'s
administration was beset by a scandal called "[The Petticoat
Affair](The_Petticoat_Affair "wikilink")", dramatized in the 1936 film
*[The Gorgeous Hussy](The_Gorgeous_Hussy "wikilink")*. A 1943 comedy
film called *[Petticoat Larceny](Petticoat_Larceny "wikilink")* (cf.
petty [larceny](larceny "wikilink")) depicted a young girl being
kidnapped by [grifters](Confidence_trick "wikilink"). In 1955, [Iron
Curtain](Iron_Curtain "wikilink") politics were satirized in a [Bob
Hope](Bob_Hope "wikilink") and [Katharine
Hepburn](Katharine_Hepburn "wikilink") film, *[The Iron
Petticoat](The_Iron_Petticoat "wikilink")*. In the same year Western
author [Chester William Harrison](Chester_William_Harrison "wikilink")
wrote a short story "Petticoat Brigade" that was turned into the film
*[The Guns of Fort Petticoat](The_Guns_of_Fort_Petticoat "wikilink")* in
1957. [Blake Edwards](Blake_Edwards "wikilink") filmed a story of an
American submarine filled with nurses from the [Battle of the
Philippines](Philippines_Campaign_(1941–42) "wikilink") called
*[Operation Petticoat](Operation_Petticoat "wikilink")* (1959).
*[Petticoat Junction](Petticoat_Junction "wikilink")* was a CBS TV
series that aired in 1963.[23] CBS had another series in the 1966–67
season called *[Pistols 'n'
Petticoats](Pistols_'n'_Petticoats "wikilink")*.[24]

## See also

-   [Breeching (boys)](Breeching_(boys) "wikilink"), a historical
    practice involving the change of dress from petticoat-like garments
    to trouser-like ones
-   [Hoop skirt](Hoop_skirt "wikilink"), a women's undergarment worn in
    various periods to extend skirts into a fashionable shape

## References

### Citations

<references/>

### Sources

-

-

-

-

-

-

## External links

-   [Quilted Petticoat, 1750-1790, in the Staten Island Historical
    Society Online Collections
    Database](https://statenisland.pastperfectonline.com/webobject/BC2BB41A-40CE-4164-BBC1-359862839466)
-   [Petticoat-Government in a Letter to the Court
    Lords (1702)](http://gynocentrism.com/2013/09/19/petticoat-government-1702-2/)

[Category:16th-century
fashion](Category:16th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Western
wear](Category:Western_wear "wikilink")
[Category:Lingerie](Category:Lingerie "wikilink") [Category:1950s
fashion](Category:1950s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1960s
fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1970s
fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing
(Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")

[1] *Oxford English Dictionary* (1989) "A light loose undergarment ...
hanging from the shoulders or waist"

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20] p.21 Campbell, Jill *Natural Masques: Gender and Identity in
Fielding's Plays and Novels* Stanford University Press

[21] "Rip Van Winkle." [p. 60](http://www.bartleby.com/310/2/1.html)

[22]

[23]

[24]