![](Charles_Camilla_Jamaica_2008.jpg "fig:Charles_Camilla_Jamaica_2008.jpg")
and [The Duchess of Cornwall](Camilla,_Duchess_of_Cornwall "wikilink")
in [Jamaica](Jamaica "wikilink").\]\] A **Quadrille dress** is a bespoke
dress worn by women in [Caribbean](Caribbean "wikilink") countries. The
quadrille dress is the [folk costume](folk_costume "wikilink") of
[Jamaica](Jamaica "wikilink"), [Dominica](Dominica "wikilink") and
[Haiti](Haiti "wikilink"). It is known by a different name in each
country. The dress is worn during the [quadrille](quadrille "wikilink")
dance.

## Jamaica

In [Jamaica](Jamaica "wikilink"), the quadrille dress is made of cotton.
It's called a *bandana skirt.* The skirt is worn with a ruffled sleeve
blouse and a matching [head tie](head_tie "wikilink"). The traditional
dress is made out of red and white cotton plaid, maroon and white plaid,
or [madras](Madras_(cloth) "wikilink").[1] The plaid material is called
*bandana fabric*. Men wear a shirt made out of the same fabric and white
pants during [quadrille](quadrille "wikilink") and folk dances.[2]
However, for weddings, the traditional male attire is a [bush
jacket](Guayabera "wikilink") made of [linen](linen "wikilink") fabric
and black dress pants [3] or a [tuxedo](Black_tie "wikilink") and the
female attire is a white [wedding dress](wedding_dress "wikilink"). In
many countries, the bush jacket is known as a guayabera.[4] In Africa,
the bush jacket is known as a safari shirt and is worn in the same
manner as the [safari jacket](safari_jacket "wikilink").

The quadrille is only danced in Jamaica and Trinidad today as a show.
Dancers will usually wear the Jamaican folk costume, which consist of a
gathered skirt of red madras bandana worn with a white peasant blouse. A
matching head scarf is often worn tied in a sort of turban fashion. This
costume is unlikely to be "bespoke" as it is only worn as a costume, for
dancers, folk singers, tour guides etc. It represents the clothing worn
by the ordinary folk in roughly the eighteenth century. Sometimes beauty
pageant contestants wear creative evening dresses inspired by the
national costume.

The bush jacket is hardly traditional. It was introduced for political
reasons in the 1970s and some men continue to wear it as a matter of
taste. Traditional attire for weddings, funerals, court dates etc. is an
ordinary suit. Office attire is either a suit or shirt and tie. The bush
jacket is an option one sees occasionally.

One would not expect to see the folk costume at a wedding. The groom
would wear a conventional suit, the bride a fashionable white gown.
Guests would wear suits and semi-formal dresses. One or two of the men
may wear bush jackets.

The only occasion where a man would wear a madras shirt and white
trousers would be if he were performing on the stage, either singing
traditional folk songs or some sort of calypso or mento in the tourist
circuit.

## Haiti

In [Haiti](Haiti "wikilink"), the quadrille dress is called a **karabela
dress**. Traditional male attire for dances, weddings, and other [formal
wear](formal_wear "wikilink") is the linen [shirt
jacket](guayabera "wikilink").

## Saint Lucia

In [Saint Lucia](Saint_Lucia "wikilink"), the name of the dress is
spelled **Kwadril dress**.

## See also

-   [Bush jacket](Guayabera "wikilink")
-   [Kariba suit](Kariba_suit "wikilink")
-   [Madras (costume)](Madras_(costume) "wikilink")
-   [National costume](National_costume "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Caribbean clothing](Category:Caribbean_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Jamaican culture](Category:Jamaican_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Haitian culture](Category:Haitian_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Caribbean culture](Category:Caribbean_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Folk
costumes](Category:Folk_costumes "wikilink")
[Category:Gowns](Category:Gowns "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]