---
title: Strapless dress
permalink: /Strapless_dress/
---

[thumb\|right\|Strapless dress by [Yiannis
Evangelides](Yiannis_Evangelides "wikilink"), New York, 1956. [PFF
Collection](/Peloponnesian_Folklore_Foundation "wikilink").](/File:1956_Yiannis_Evangelides_strapless_evening_dress.jpg "wikilink")
A **strapless dress** or top is a garment that stays put around the
upper body without [shoulder straps](/shoulder_strap "wikilink") or
other visible means of support. It is usually supported by an internal
[corset](/corset "wikilink") and/or [brassiere](/brassiere "wikilink"),
with the tightness of the bodice preventing the dress from slipping out
of position.[1]

## History

[thumb\|150px\|left\|Actress [Libby Holman](Libby_Holman "wikilink") in
an early strapless dress (1930)](/File:Libby-Holman-1930.jpg "wikilink")

### 1930s to 1980s

According to [Richard Martin](/Richard_Martin_(curator) "wikilink") and
[Harold Koda](/Harold_Koda "wikilink"), the modern strapless dress first
appeared in the 1930s, where it was popularised by designers such as
[Mainbocher](/Mainbocher "wikilink"), and, from the late 1940s,
[Christian Dior](/Christian_Dior "wikilink").[2] The July 18, 1938,
issue of *[Life](/Life_(magazine) "wikilink")* claimed that the
"absolutely strapless, sleeveless evening dress" was a 1937–38
invention.[3] However, that was predated in 1930 by the actress [Libby
Holman](/Libby_Holman "wikilink"), who had been photographed in an
apparently strapless dress that year.[4] Holman became associated with
the strapless dress and is regularly credited with inventing
it,[5][6][7] or at least being one of its first high-profile wearers.[8]

In 1934, Mainbocher produced his first strapless gown, a black satin
design which has been described as the first strapless evening dress.[9]
Along with Holman and Mainbocher, the heiress [Brenda
Frazier](/Brenda_Frazier "wikilink") is also credited with popularising
the style when she wore a strapless [débutante
dress](/débutante_dress "wikilink") for her
[debut](/debutante "wikilink") and famously appeared in it on the
November 14, 1938, cover of *Life*.[10][11][12] [thumb\|250px\|Rita
Hayworth in *Gilda*
(1946)](/File:Rita_Hayworth_as_Gilda_performing_"Put_The_Blame_On_Mame"_in_the_trailer_for_the_film_Gilda.jpg "wikilink")

Strapless dresses remained popular after the Second World War, with the
style sometimes being described as the "naked look".[13] One of the most
famous strapless dresses of this period was the [black satin
gown](/Black_dress_of_Rita_Hayworth "wikilink") worn by [Rita
Hayworth](/Rita_Hayworth "wikilink") for a song and dance routine in
*[Gilda](/Gilda "wikilink")*.[14] Hayworth's performance demonstrated to
viewers that strapless dresses could be secure enough to move around and
dance in without risk of indecent exposure.[15] Despite this, more
conservative customers might add shoulder straps to their new strapless
dresses.[16] The style was also problematic for those who objected to
its perceived immodesty. During the 1940s and 1950s, Catholic
campaigners in the United States protested against "immodest" clothing,
including [two-piece](/Bikini "wikilink") and strapless swimsuits and
dresses.[17] In 1954, the United States Army tried to ban Army wives and
daughters in Germany from wearing shorts, jeans, and strapless dresses,
"except at appropriate social functions."[18]

During the 1950s, notable strapless dress designers included [Madame
Grès](/Grès "wikilink"), whose flowing Grecian dresses were mounted upon
custom-designed interior corsets by [Alice
Cadolle](/Alice_Cadolle "wikilink").[19]

In the 1970s, [Halston](/Halston "wikilink") designed an unstructured
strapless dress.[20] The knitted [tube top](/tube_top "wikilink") was
worn as a casual strapless option,[21] and by the 1980s, strapless
dresses were made in stretchy, elastic fabrics which did not require
boning or interior structure.[22]

### 1990s onwards

[thumb\|200px\|Japanese bride wearing a strapless dress,
2010](/File:Himeji-Oshiro-Matsuri_2010_087.JPG "wikilink") In 2012, the
strapless dress was described as the most widely requested style for
Western wedding dresses.[23] [Vera Wang](/Vera_Wang "wikilink") is
sometimes credited with introducing this style of bridal dress in the
first decade of the 21st century,[24] although strapless dresses were an
increasingly valid option from the 1990s onwards with the growing
popularity of formal [civil weddings](/civil_wedding "wikilink") from
the 1990s.[25][26] However, for religious weddings, strapless and
shoulder-baring styles are potentially controversial,[27] and despite
the popularity of the strapless wedding dress it is considered by some
to be a "rejection of the virginal ideal".[28]

The strapless dress is also a very popular style for [red carpet
fashion](/red_carpet_fashion "wikilink").[29]

## Social and cultural context

Since their introduction, strapless garments have proved problematic in
many contexts. In the early 21st century, many schools and workplaces
specifically forbid strapless garments as part of their [dress
code](/dress_code "wikilink"). An [Adecco](/Adecco "wikilink") survey
published in *[The Wall Street
Journal](/The_Wall_Street_Journal "wikilink")* in 2012 indicated that
72% of Americans thought strapless tops were inappropriate office
wear.[30]

### Religious stances

Strapless garments may be singled out for particular censure by
preachers and clerics. In 2005, a Muslim cleric declared strapless
garments "satanic", along with other revealing garments such as
[miniskirts](/miniskirt "wikilink") and [see-through
clothing](/see-through_clothing "wikilink").[31] [Spencer W.
Kimball](/Spencer_W._Kimball "wikilink"), the 12th
[President](/President_of_the_Church_(LDS_Church) "wikilink") of [The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints](/The_Church_of_Jesus_Christ_of_Latter-day_Saints "wikilink")
(LDS church), declared that strapless gowns were neither righteous nor
approved, and that no Latter-day Saint woman should wear one at any
time,[32] whilst another Latter-day Saints declared them an "abomination
in the sight of the Lord".[33] Such views may not necessarily reflect
those of the majority of their associated religion, although a rule of
thumb is that strapless garments are only acceptable in religious
contexts, such as Catholic churches or Jewish [bat
mitzvahs](/bat_mitzvah "wikilink"), if the shoulders and arms are
covered.[34][35]

## References

[Category:Dresses](/Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:History of
fashion](/Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink") [Category:20th-century
fashion](/Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](/Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] Scheper, Jeanne. ["Libby
Holman."](http://jwa.org/encyclopedia/article/holman-libby) Jewish
Women: A Comprehensive Historical Encyclopedia. 1 March 2009. Jewish
Women's Archive. (Viewed on March 25, 2013).

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]