![](Liberty_and_Company_tea_gown_c._1887.jpg "fig:Liberty_and_Company_tea_gown_c._1887.jpg")
tea gown of figured silk twill, c. 1887. [Los Angeles County Museum of
Art](Los_Angeles_County_Museum_of_Art "wikilink"), M.2007.211.901.\]\]

A **tea gown** or **tea-gown** is a woman's [dress](dress "wikilink")
for informal entertaining at home. These dresses, which became popular
around the mid-19th century, are characterized by unstructured lines and
light fabrics. Early tea [gowns](gowns "wikilink") were a European
development influenced by Asian clothing and historical approach from
the 18th century which led to the renaissance time period of long and
flowing sleeves.[1][2] Part of this European sense of fashion came from
the [Japanese](Japan "wikilink") [kimono](kimono "wikilink") which was
worn by Japanese women during a wedding or any formal ceremonies.[3]

Tea gowns were intended to be worn without a corset or assistance from
the maid; however, elegance always came first.[4]

During the 19th century, it was not appropriate for women to be seen in
public wearing a tea gown.[5] They were intended to be worn indoors with
family and close friends during a dinner party.[6][7]

Although tea gowns were meant for midday wear, they could be worn into
the evening.[8] Women started wearing tea gowns in the evening for
dinner or certain events at home with close friends and family by
1900.[9] Tea gowns intended for day wear usually had high necks, while
evening tea gowns had lower necks.[10]

## Notes

## References

-   Takeda, Sharon Sadako, and Kaye Durland Spilker, *Fashioning
    Fashion: European Dress in Detail, 1700 - 1915*, LACMA/Prestel USA
    (2010),

[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink")

[1] Takeda and Spilker (2010), p. 112

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]