![](Kuniyoshi_Utagawa,_Man_on_a_boat.jpg "fig:Kuniyoshi_Utagawa,_Man_on_a_boat.jpg")
([Utagawa Kuniyoshi](Utagawa_Kuniyoshi "wikilink"), late Edo era)\]\] A
is a Japanese [garment](garment "wikilink"), a casual summer
[kimono](kimono "wikilink")[1] usually made of cotton or synthetic
fabric, and unlined.

## Overview

Yukata are worn by men and women. Like other forms of traditional
[Japanese clothing](Japanese_clothing "wikilink"), yukata are made with
straight seams and wide sleeves. Men's yukata are distinguished by the
shorter sleeve extension of approximately 10 cm from the armpit seam,
compared to the longer 20 cm sleeve extension in women's yukata. A
standard yukata ensemble consists of a cotton undergarment (juban),
yukata, [obi](Obi_(sash) "wikilink"), bare feet, sandals
([geta](Geta_(footwear) "wikilink")), a foldable or fixed [hand
fan](hand_fan "wikilink"), and a carry bag (kinchaku).
[Kinchaku](Kinchaku "wikilink") are used by both men and women to carry
cellphones and other small personal items. For men, an optional hat may
also be worn to protect the head from the sun. *Yukata* literally means
*bath(ing) clothes*, although their use is not limited to after-bath
wear. Yukata are a common sight in Japan during the hot summer months.

![](Hyozu-jinja_兵主神社例祭（西脇市黒田庄町岡）2011.10.9_DSCF1166.jpg "Hyozu-jinja_兵主神社例祭（西脇市黒田庄町岡）2011.10.9_DSCF1166.jpg")

The yukata was originally worn as a bathrobe, but in Japan currently, it
is generally worn only as a summer garment. There are few regions where
yukata is worn traditionally as bathrobes all year round. However, in
some hot spring areas (e.g. [Kinosaki Onsen](Kinosaki_Onsen "wikilink"),
[Kusatsu Onsen](Kusatsu_Onsen "wikilink")) it is possible to experience
all-year-round the authenticity of wearing a yukata as a bathrobe while
visiting the various onsens in town.[2]

Traditionally yukata were mostly made of
[indigo](Indigo_dye "wikilink")-dyed cotton but today a wide variety of
colors and designs are available. As with kimono, the general rule with
yukata is that younger people wear bright, vivid colors and bold
patterns, while older people wear dark, matured colors and dull
patterns. A child may wear a multicolored print and a young woman may
wear a floral print, while an older woman would confine herself to a
traditional dark blue with geometric patterns. Men in general may wear
solid dark colors. Since the late 1990s, yukata have experienced
increasing popularity.

Yukata are worn at outdoor summer events such as
[hanabi](Fireworks "wikilink") (fireworks) displays and
[bon-odori](bon-odori "wikilink") festivals. Yukata are also worn at
traditional Japanese inns ([ryokan](Ryokan_(Japanese_inn) "wikilink")),
especially after bathing in hot springs ([onsen](onsen "wikilink")). In
some onsen resort towns like [Kinosaki](Kinosaki "wikilink"),
[Dogo](Dogo_Onsen "wikilink"), Kurokawa and
[Kusatsu](Kusatsu_Onsen "wikilink"), it is also common to see guests
strolling around town in their yukata and geta while onsen-hopping.[3]

## Customs

![](Yukata_tokyo.JPG "fig:Yukata_tokyo.JPG")
![](How_to_Put_on_a_Woman's_Yukata.webm "fig:How_to_Put_on_a_Woman's_Yukata.webm")

The left side of the yukata is wrapped over the right side (commonly
reversed with right over left when dressing a body for a funeral) and
secured with an *[obi](obi_(sash) "wikilink")* sash tied in a bow with
the excess or with the *koshi-himo*. Traditionally the bow is placed in
the back as historically bows tied in the front have represented
prostitution. In private, such as after a bath, the yukata may be simply
belted. Yukata are often worn with wooden sandals called
*[geta](geta_(footwear) "wikilink")*, but *[tabi](tabi "wikilink")* are
not usually worn.

## References

## External links

-

-

[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Japanese
clothing](Category:Japanese_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Robes and
cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink") [Category:Articles
containing video
clips](Category:Articles_containing_video_clips "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]