![](Bolo_tie.jpg "fig:Bolo_tie.jpg") A **bolo tie** (sometimes **bola
tie** or **shoestring necktie**) is a type of necktie consisting of a
piece of cord or braided leather with decorative metal tips (called
[aiguillettes](aiguillette "wikilink")) and secured with an ornamental
clasp or slide.

Bolos can be made, using flat objects such as lady's pins, coins,
polished stones, bottle openers, and refrigerator magnets. Cords of
leather and cordage stock, clips, and tips are widely available from
jewelry supply firms.

## Popularity

![](H._Bud_Chadwickson.jpg "fig:H._Bud_Chadwickson.jpg") In the [United
States](United_States "wikilink"), bolo ties are widely associated with
[Western wear](Western_wear "wikilink") and are generally most common in
the western areas of the country. Bolo tie slides and tips in
[silver](silver "wikilink") have been part of [Hopi](Hopi "wikilink"),
[Navajo](Navajo_people "wikilink"), [Zuni](Zuni_people "wikilink"), and
[Puebloan](Puebloan "wikilink") [silversmithing](silversmith "wikilink")
traditions since the mid-20th century.[1]
![](Bolotie_Navajo.jpg "fig:Bolotie_Navajo.jpg") on a bolo tie\]\] The
bolo tie was made the official [neckwear](neckwear "wikilink") of
[Arizona](Arizona "wikilink") in 1971. [New
Mexico](New_Mexico "wikilink") passed a non-binding measure to designate
the bolo as the state's official neckwear in 1987. On March 13, 2007,
[New Mexico Governor](Governor_of_New_Mexico "wikilink") [Bill
Richardson](Bill_Richardson "wikilink") signed into law that the bolo
tie was the [state's official
tie](New_Mexico_symbols#Other "wikilink").[2] Also in 2007, the bolo tie
was named the official tie of [Texas](Texas "wikilink").[3] Politicians
and officials from [western](Western_United_States "wikilink") states
will often wear them, such as former [Montana
Governor](Governor_of_Montana "wikilink") [Brian
Schweitzer](Brian_Schweitzer "wikilink") and [Alaska](Alaska "wikilink")
representative [Zack Fields](Zack_Fields "wikilink").

In the [United Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink"), bolo ties are known
as **bootlace ties**. They were popular with 1950s [Teddy
Boys](Teddy_Boy_(youth_culture) "wikilink"), who wore them with [drape
suits](drape_suit "wikilink").[4][5]

Bolo ties became fashionable in the 1980s with [rockabilly
revivalists](Rockabilly#The_Rockabilly_Look "wikilink") and [new
wavers](new_wave_music "wikilink").[6] The bolo tie returned as a
popular fashion accessory in the fall of 1988 when male
[Hollywood](Hollywood "wikilink") stars would be frequently found
wearing them. [Chain stores](Chain_store "wikilink") like
[Jeanswest](Jeanswest "wikilink") and
[Merry-Go-Round](Merry-Go-Round_(retailer) "wikilink") sold multiple
choices for all occasions.

During the 1980s and 1990s bolo ties, some elegant and expensive, were
sold in [Japan](Japan "wikilink"), [Korea](Korea "wikilink"), and
[China](China "wikilink"). Some had fancy, hand-made cords and unusual
tips. Sales overseas skyrocketed post-1970s; this was due to the
overflow from the United States, where it had fallen out of fashion in
the 1980s.[7]

During the [2013 NFL season](2013_NFL_season "wikilink"), [San Diego
Chargers](San_Diego_Chargers "wikilink") quarterback [Philip
Rivers](Philip_Rivers "wikilink") captured media attention for his
frequent usage of bolo ties. He was noted wearing it again after
defeating the [Cincinnati Bengals](Cincinnati_Bengals "wikilink") in the
[2013–14 NFL playoffs](2013–14_NFL_playoffs "wikilink").[8][9]

## Origins

Victor Emanuel Cedarstaff of [Wickenburg,AZ](Wickenburg,AZ "wikilink")
claims to have [invented](Invention "wikilink") the bolo tie in the late
1940s and later [patented](patent "wikilink") his slide design.[10]

According to an article in *[Sunset](Sunset_(magazine) "wikilink")*:

## References

## External links

-   [Montana Leader Defends Bolo
    Ties](https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/06/10/AR2005061001829.html)

[Category:Native American
culture](Category:Native_American_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Neckties](Category:Neckties "wikilink") [Category:Western
wear](Category:Western_wear "wikilink") [Category:1950s
fashion](Category:1950s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1970s
fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1980s
fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Symbols of
Arizona](Category:Symbols_of_Arizona "wikilink") [Category:Symbols of
New Mexico](Category:Symbols_of_New_Mexico "wikilink") [Category:Symbols
of Texas](Category:Symbols_of_Texas "wikilink")

[1] Tanner, Clara Lee *Ray Manley's Portraits & Turquoise of Southwest
Indians*. Ray Manley Photography Inc.\[Tucson\], 1975, Library of
Congress Catalog Card Number 75-38328

[2]

[3] [Texas, The Lone Star State: Bola Tie (Bolo
Tie)](http://www.barrypopik.com/index.php/texas/entry/bola_tie_bolo_tie/)

[4] Cross, Robert: *Steven Berkoff and the Theatre of Self-Performance*,
Manchester University Press, , p. 36

[5] Ribeiro, Aileen: *Dress and Morality*, Berg Publishers 2003, , p.
164

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10] , filed May 24, 1954, issued July 28, 1959, to Victor Emmanual
Cedarstaff