![](Bow-tie-colour-isolated.jpg "Bow-tie-colour-isolated.jpg")

The **bow tie** is a type of [necktie](necktie "wikilink"). A modern bow
tie is tied using a common [shoelace knot](shoelace_knot "wikilink"),
which is also called the **bow knot** for that reason. It consists of a
ribbon of fabric tied around the [collar](collar_(clothing) "wikilink")
of a [shirt](shirt "wikilink") in a [symmetrical](symmetry "wikilink")
manner so that the two opposite ends form loops.

There are generally three types of bow ties: the pre-tied, the clip on,
and the self tie. Pre-tied bow ties are ties in which the distinctive
bow is sewn onto a band that goes around the neck and clips to secure.
Some "clip-ons" dispense with the band altogether, instead clipping
straight to the collar. The traditional bow tie, consisting of a strip
of cloth which the wearer has to tie by hand, is also known as a
"self-tie," "tie-it-yourself," or "freestyle" bow tie.

Bow ties may be made of any fabric material, but most are made from
[silk](silk "wikilink"), [polyester](polyester "wikilink"),
[cotton](cotton "wikilink"), or a mixture of fabrics. Some fabrics
(e.g., [wool](wool "wikilink") or velvet) are much less common for bow
ties than for ordinary [four-in-hand](four-in-hand "wikilink") neckties.

## Origin and history

![](Johan_Krouthén_-_Självporträtt_1904.jpg "fig:Johan_Krouthén_-_Självporträtt_1904.jpg")
wearing a bow tie\]\] The bow tie originated among
[Croatian](Croatia "wikilink") [mercenaries](mercenaries "wikilink")
during the [Thirty Years' War](Thirty_Years'_War "wikilink") of the 17th
century: the Croat mercenaries used a [scarf](scarf "wikilink") around
the neck to hold together the opening of their
[shirts](shirt "wikilink"). This was soon adopted (under the name
*[cravat](cravat "wikilink"),* derived from the
[French](French_language "wikilink") for "[Croat](Croat "wikilink")") by
the upper classes in [France](France "wikilink"), then a leader in
[fashion](fashion "wikilink"), and flourished in the 18th and 19th
centuries. It is uncertain whether the cravat then evolved into the bow
tie and [four-in-hand](four-in-hand "wikilink") necktie, or whether the
cravat gave rise to the bow tie, which in turn led to the four-in-hand
necktie.

The most traditional bow ties are usually of a fixed length and are made
for a specific size neck. Sizes can vary between approximately 14 and 19
inches as with a comparable shirt collar. Fixed-length bow ties are
preferred when worn with the most formal wing-collar shirts, so as not
to expose the buckle or clasp of an adjustable bow tie. Adjustable bow
ties are the standard when the tie is to be worn with a less formal,
lie-down collar shirts which obscure the neckband of the tie.
"One-size-fits-all" adjustable bow ties are a later invention that help
to moderate production costs. ![](Ziehrer.jpg "fig:Ziehrer.jpg") wearing
a 19th-century style bow tie\]\]

## Stereotypes of bow tie wearers

> To its devotees, the bow tie suggests iconoclasm of an Old World sort,
> a fusty adherence to a contrarian point of view. The bow tie hints at
> intellectualism, real or feigned, and sometimes suggests technical
> acumen, perhaps because it is so hard to tie. Bow ties are worn by
> magicians, country doctors, lawyers and professors and by people
> hoping to look like the above. But perhaps most of all, wearing a bow
> tie is a way of broadcasting an aggressive lack of concern for what
> other people think.
> - Warren St John in *[The New York
> Times](The_New_York_Times "wikilink")*[1]

![](HowToTieBowtie_VersionA.png "HowToTieBowtie_VersionA.png")

Popular perception tends to associate bow tie wearers with particular
[professions](profession "wikilink"), such as architects,[2] finance
receipt collectors, attorneys,[3] university professors, teachers,
waiters, and politicians. [Pediatricians](Pediatrics "wikilink")
frequently wear bow ties since infants cannot grab them the way they
could grab a [four-in-hand](four-in-hand "wikilink") necktie. Bow ties
do not readily droop into places where they would get soiled or where
they could, whether accidentally or deliberately, strangle the wearer.
Clowns sometimes use an oversize bow tie for its comic effect. Classical
musicians traditionally perform in [white tie](white_tie "wikilink") or
[black tie](black_tie "wikilink") ensembles, of which both designs are
bow ties. Bow ties are also associated with
[weddings](weddings "wikilink"), mainly because of their almost
universal inclusion in traditional formal attire.

Bow ties, or slight variations thereof, have also made their way into
women's wear, especially business attire. The 1980s saw professional
women, especially in law, banking, and the corporate world, donning very
conservative tailored suits, with a rise of almost 6 million units in
sales.[4] These were often worn with buttoned-up blouses, some with
pleats up the front like tuxedo shirts, and accessorized with bow ties
that were slightly fuller than the standard bow ties worn by their male
counterparts, but typically consisting of the same fabrics, colors, and
patterns as men's ties.

[Russell Smith](Russell_Smith_(novelist) "wikilink"), style columnist
for Toronto's *[The Globe and Mail](The_Globe_and_Mail "wikilink"),*
records mixed opinions of bow tie wearers. He observed that bow ties
were experiencing a potential comeback among men,[5][6] though "the
class conscious man recoils at the idea" of pre-tied bow ties and
"\[l\]eft-wingers" ... "recoil at what they perceive to be a symbol of
political conservatism." He argues that, however, that anachronism is
the point, and that bow tie wearers are making a public statement that
they disdain changing fashion. Such people may not be economic
conservatives, he argues, but they *are* **social** conservatives. In
Smith's view, the bow tie is "the embodiment of propriety," an indicator
of fastidiousness, and "an instant sign of nerddom in
[Hollywood](Cinema_of_the_United_States "wikilink") movies," but "not
the mark of a ladies' man" and "not exactly sexy."[7] To this image he
attributes the association of the bow tie with newspaper editors
(because of their fastidiousness with words), high-school principals,
and bachelor English teachers. Most men, he observes, only wear bow ties
with formal dress.

## Current

The four-in-hand necktie is still more prominent in contemporary Western
society, it being seen the most at business meetings, formal functions,
schools, and sometimes even at home. However, the bow tie is making a
comeback at fun-formal events such as dinners, [cocktail
parties](Cocktail_party "wikilink"), and nights out on the town. Bow
ties are often worn with suits by those trying to convey a more
dressed-up, formal image, whether in business or social venues. Bow ties
are still generally popular with men of all ages in the [American
South](American_South "wikilink"), having never gone out of fashion
there.

Traditional opinion remains that it is inappropriate to wear anything
other than a bow tie with a [dinner jacket](dinner_jacket "wikilink").

Bow ties are also sometimes worn as an alternative to [ascot
ties](ascot_tie "wikilink") and four-in-hand neckties when wearing
[morning dress](morning_dress "wikilink").

The dress code of "[black tie](black_tie "wikilink")" requires a black
bow tie. Most military [mess dress](mess_dress "wikilink") uniforms
incorporate a bow tie.

## Types

Shown below on the right is one style of ready-tied bow tie; there is
also a clip-on that does not go around the neck but clips to the collar
points. Wearing a ready-tied bow tie at formal occasions requiring a
black or white tie dress code is usually considered a faux pas, though
at occasions such as Schools Leavers' Proms or ones at which the
participants are unlikely to have had much experience wearing bow ties
it may be commonplace. If choosing a self-tie/tie-it-yourself/freestyle
bow tie, there are usually two shapes available: the "bat wing," which
is parallel-sided like a [cricket bat](cricket_bat "wikilink"), and the
"thistle," also known as the "butterfly." An example of each can also be
seen below. Which is worn is a matter of personal preference. Some other
shapes do exist; for instance, the Diamond Point, with pointed tips at
both ends. This is a double-ended type, with both ends shaped, though
occasionally, ties are tied in the single-ended type, in which only one
end flares out to give the batwing or thistle shape, and the other
remains thin. To tie one of these requires careful consideration, to
ensure the broader end finishes in front of the thinner one. As shown in
the pictures below, another type of ready-tie bow tie is the [wooden bow
tie](wooden_bow_tie "wikilink"). A fairly new product made mostly in the
U.S and Canada. Other materials are also in use. An example would be bow
ties that are made of natural bird feathers. Also fairly new product
made mostly in the U.S. and Europe (in Poland).

<File:2> Silk Bow Ties.JPG\|Silk bow ties. Fixed length with "thistle"
ends (left) and adjustable with "bat wing" ends (right). <File:BOWTIE>
red velvet pretied clipon.JPG\|A pre-tied bow tie <File:Yellow> self tie
cotton bow tie, designed and made in the UK.jpg\|Bright Yellow patterned
self-tie bow tie, made of [cotton](cotton "wikilink"), designed and made
in the UK <File:Wooden> bow tie 1.jpg\| Wooden bow tie, made in Canada
and U.S <File:Wooden> bow tie 3.jpg\| Wooden bow tie, made in Canada and
U.S <File:Wooden> bow ties with ivory fabric.jpg\|thumb\|Wooden bow ties
with ivory fabric

<File:IMG> Z9805.jpg\|Bow tie made of feathers, made in Poland

<File:Bowtie_Butterfly.jpg%7CBow> tie, type Butterfly, silk
<File:Bowtie_Batwing.jpg%7CBow> tie, type Batwing, wool
<File:Bowtie_Diamond.jpg%7CBow> tie, type Diamond Point, silk
<File:Colourful> Bow tie.jpg\|Informal bow tie



## Designers

Some notable designers of bow ties are
[Charvet](Charvet_Place_Vendôme "wikilink"), who invented some novel
styles such as a cross between a batwing and a butterfly for the [Duke
of Windsor](Edward_VIII_of_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink") in the
1950s,[8] [Duchamp](Duchamp_(clothing) "wikilink") or [Paul
Smith](Paul_Smith_(fashion_designer) "wikilink").

## Gallery

<File:Jim-rogers-madrid-160610.jpg>\|[Jim Rogers](Jim_Rogers "wikilink")
wearing a bow tie in 2010 <File:Elio> Di Rupo 2012.jpg\|[Elio Di
Rupo](Elio_Di_Rupo "wikilink"), former [Prime Minister of
Belgium](Prime_Minister_of_Belgium "wikilink"), is a regular wearer of
bow ties. <File:Colonel> Harland Sanders in character.jpg\|[Colonel
Sanders](Colonel_Sanders "wikilink") wearing his distinctive string tie
<File:Bill> Nye with trademark blue lab coat and bowtie.jpg\|[Bill
Nye](Bill_Nye "wikilink"), on his show, wore a powder blue lab coat and
bow tie. <File:Pee-Wee_Herman_(1988).jpg>\|[Paul
Reubens](Paul_Reubens "wikilink") as [Pee-wee
Herman](Pee-wee_Herman "wikilink") wore a trademark red bow tie.
<File:MichaelMaxey2.jpg>\|[Michael Maxey](Michael_Maxey "wikilink"),
president of [Roanoke College](Roanoke_College "wikilink") is well known
for wearing bow-ties. <File:Tucker> Carlson (5222916).jpg\|[Tucker
Carlson](Tucker_Carlson "wikilink"), presently a host on the [Fox News
Channel](Fox_News_Channel "wikilink"), wearing a bow tie in early 2004.

## References

## External links

-   [wikiHow on How to tie a bow
    tie](http://www.wikihow.com/Tie-a-Bow-Tie)

[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Neckties](Category:Neckties "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]