![](Cravat_(clothing).jpg "Cravat_(clothing).jpg")

The **cravat** () is a neckband, the forerunner of the modern tailored
[necktie](necktie "wikilink") and [bow tie](bow_tie "wikilink"),
originating from a style worn by members of the seventeenth-century
military unit known as [the Croats](Croats_(military_unit) "wikilink").

From the end of the sixteenth century, the term *band* applied to any
long-strip neckcloth that was not a [ruff](ruff_(clothing) "wikilink").
The ruff, a starched, pleated white [linen](linen "wikilink") strip,
originated earlier in the sixteenth century as a neckcloth (readily
changeable, to minimize the soiling of a
[doublet](doublet_(clothing) "wikilink")), as a
[bib](Bib_(garment) "wikilink"), or as a [napkin](napkin "wikilink"). A
band could be either a plain, attached shirt
[collar](collar_(clothing) "wikilink") or a detachable "falling band"
that draped over the doublet collar. It is possible that initially,
cravats were worn to hide soil on shirts.[1] Alternatively, it was
thought to serve as psychological protection of the neck during battle
from attack by a spear.

## History

![](Bartholomeus_van_der_Helst_-_Portrait_of_Emanuel_de_Geer.jpg "fig:Bartholomeus_van_der_Helst_-_Portrait_of_Emanuel_de_Geer.jpg")\]\]
According to the 1828 encyclopedic *The art of tying the cravat:
demonstrated in sixteen lessons*, the Romans were the first to wear
knotted kerchiefs around their neck, but the modern version of the
cravat (French: *la cravate*) originated in the 1660s. During the reign
of [Louis XIV of France](Louis_XIV_of_France "wikilink"),
[Croatian](Croats "wikilink") [mercenaries](mercenary "wikilink") were
enlisted in 1660 wearing a necktie called a *tour de cou*.[2] The
traditional Croat military kit aroused [Parisian](Paris "wikilink")
curiosity about the unusual, picturesque scarves distinctively knotted
at the Croats' necks:

"*In 1660 a regiment of Croats arrived in France — a part of their
singular costume excited the greatest admiration, and was immediately
and generally imitated; this was a tour de cou , made (for the private
soldiers) of common lace, and of muslin or silk for the officers ; the
ends were arranged en rosette , or ornamented with a button or tuft,
which hung gracefully on the breast. This new arrangement, which
confined the throat but very slightly, was at first termed a Croat,
since corrupted to Cravat. The Cravats of the officers and people of
rank were extremely fine, and the ends were embroidered or trimmed with
broad lace ; those for the lower classes were subsequently made of cloth
or cotton, or at the best of black taffeta, plaited: which was tied
round the neck by two small strings.*"[3]

Prominent early champions of the style were:

<File:Jan> davids de heem-fleurs avec portrait guillaume III
d'Orange.jpg\|[William III of
England](William_III_of_England "wikilink"), here aged 10 in 1660
<File:John> II Casimir Vasa 1.PNG\|[John II Casimir
Vasa](John_II_Casimir_Vasa "wikilink"), c. 1660
<File:Louis1667.jpg>\|[Louis XIV of
France](Louis_XIV_of_France "wikilink") in 1667

Often the [Dubrovnik](Dubrovnik "wikilink") poet [Ivan
Gundulic](Ivan_Gundulic "wikilink") is credited with the invention of
the cravat, due to a portrait hanging in the [Rector's Palace,
Dubrovnik](Rector's_Palace,_Dubrovnik "wikilink"). The scholar depicted
in the painting looks very much like the frontispiece to his *Osman*
published in 1844. However, considering the hairstyle, this portrait is
more probably a later portrait of his namesake Dživo (Ivan) Šiškov
Gundulić, also a Dubrovnik poet. In their honor,
[Croatia](Croatia "wikilink") celebrates Cravat Day on October 18.[4]

<File:Ivan> Gundulic - Osman frontispiece (1844)
dielaivanagundu00gundgoog 0008.jpg\|Frontispiece for *Osman*, 1844
<File:De> Gondola.jpg\|Ivan Gundulic, but more probably his younger
relation Dživo (Ivan) Šiškov Gundulić (1678 - 1721)

On returning to [England](England "wikilink") from exile in 1660,
[Charles II](Charles_II_of_England "wikilink") imported with him the
latest new word in fashion: "A cravatte is another kind of adornment for
the neck being nothing else but a long towel put about the Collar, and
so tyed before with a Bow Knott; this is the original of all such
Wearings; but now by the Art and Inventions of the seamsters, there is
so many new ways of making them, that it would be a task to name, much
more to describe them".[5]

During the wars of [Louis XIV](Louis_XIV_of_France "wikilink") of
1689–1697, except for court, the flowing cravat was replaced with the
more current, and equally military, "Steinkirk", named after the [Battle
of Steenkerque](Battle_of_Steenkerque "wikilink") in 1692. The Steinkirk
was a long, narrow, plain or lightly-trimmed neckcloth worn with
military dress, wrapped once about the neck in a loose knot, with the
lace of fringed ends twisted together and tucked out of the way into a
button-hole, either of the coat or the waistcoat. The steinkirk was
popular with men and women until the 1720s.

The [maccaronis](maccaroni_(fashion) "wikilink") reintroduced the
flowing cravat in the 1770s, and the manner of a man's knotting became
indicative of his taste and style, to the extent that after the [Battle
of Waterloo](Battle_of_Waterloo "wikilink") (1815) the cravat began to
be referred to as a "[tie](Necktie "wikilink")".

## Steinkirk

A **Steinkirk** was a type of cravat designed to be worn in deliberate
disarray. The fashion apparently began after troops at the [Battle of
Steenkerque](Battle_of_Steenkerque "wikilink") in 1692 had no time to
tie their cravats properly before going into action. [Colley
Cibber](Colley_Cibber "wikilink")'s play *The Careless Husband* (1704)
had a famous [Steinkirk
Scene](Colley_Cibber#The_Careless_Husband "wikilink").

## Gallery

<File:Neckcloth.JPG%7CA> [Regency](Regency_era "wikilink")-style
neckcloth tied in a bow on a Grafton collar
<File:Neckclothitania-1818.gif%7CAn> image from the 1818
*Neckclothitania* satirizing different cravat knots <File:Robert>
Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh and 2. marquess of
Londonderry.jpg\|[Robert Stewart, Viscount
Castlereagh](Robert_Stewart,_Viscount_Castlereagh "wikilink"), wearing a
cravat <File:George> Chinnery - An Unknown Man - Google Art
Project.jpg\|An unknown man wearing a cravat in the early nineteenth
century <File:Gilbert> Stuart - Colonel Isaac Barre - Google Art
Project.jpg\|Colonel [Isaac Barre](Isaac_Barre "wikilink") wearing a
cravat in the mid-eighteenth century <File:Thomas> Tooke.jpg\|[Thomas
Tooke](Thomas_Tooke "wikilink") wearing a cravat in the late eighteenth
century

## See also

-   [Cravat Regiment](Cravat_Regiment "wikilink")
-   [Pussy bow](Pussy_bow "wikilink")

## References

## Sources

-

## External links

-

-   *[The Art of Tying the
    Cravat (1828)](https://archive.org/details/b22018967/page/13)* by H.
    Le Blanc, (reprinted as )

[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Neckties](Category:Neckties "wikilink") [Category:17th-century
introductions](Category:17th-century_introductions "wikilink")

[1] Coffignon, A. (1888). *Paris vivant. Les coulisses de la mode*
p.104. La librairie illustrée, Paris

[2] [The art of tying the cravat: demonstrated in sixteen
lessons](https://archive.org/details/b22018967/page/13), by H. Le Blanc,
1828

[3]

[4]

[5] [Randle Holme](Randle_Holme "wikilink"), *Academy of Armory and
Blazon*, 1688.