
*For the 1992 film directed by Robert Mandel see [School
Ties](School_Ties "wikilink").*

![](Uddingston_Grammar_School_Ties.jpg "fig:Uddingston_Grammar_School_Ties.jpg")
![](Sjacs_tie.jpg "fig:Sjacs_tie.jpg") The **school tie** and the **old
school tie** are a style of [necktie](necktie "wikilink") which are
[British](United_Kingdom "wikilink") institutions particularly
associated with [public
schools](Public_school_(United_Kingdom) "wikilink").[1]

## School tie

A school tie indicates membership of a particular school, and sometimes
of a particular [house](house_system "wikilink") in that school.

## Old school tie

An **old school tie** is a [necktie](necktie "wikilink") that, on
leaving school, former pupils are often entitled to wear, in their
school or old-boy club colours. According to protocol, it may only be
worn by former pupils. This symbol can be a discreet passport to the
[old boy network](old_boy_network "wikilink"), and such ties can be an
indication of one's social standing. Conversely, wearing a tie to which
you have no right is a serious social gaffe.[2]

Although originally an institution of male-only schools, some schools of
mixed or female-only membership do present their female leavers with a
tie or other equivalent. Alternative clothing such as socks, scarfs,
pyjamas and even underwear may also be available in the old-boy/old-girl
colours.

Exclusive ties are not limited to British public schools: they are also
a practice of some private schools in Australia, many private and some
of the more prestigious state schools in [New
Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink"), many clubs, military regiments and
colleges of universities such as
[Oxford](University_of_Oxford "wikilink") and
[Cambridge](University_of_Cambridge "wikilink"), and have also spread to
some of Britain's former [imperial](British_Empire "wikilink")
possessions, including [Canada](Canada "wikilink") and the [United
States](United_States "wikilink").

## As a metaphor

The 'old school tie'[3] is used by the British press and many native
English speakers as a metaphor for [old-boy social
networks](Old_boy_network "wikilink"), [nepotism](nepotism "wikilink"),
and the relatively disproportionate success of former pupils of major
public schools, especially in politics and business. For example, after
the [2010 General
Election](2010_United_Kingdom_general_election "wikilink"), *[The
Times](The_Times "wikilink")* noted that 6% of the parliamentary Tory
Party were [Old Etonians](Old_Etonians "wikilink"), under the headline
"Toriesâ€™ old school tie still rules".[4] Five years later, in 2015, the
*[New Statesman](New_Statesman "wikilink")* observed that, "The power of
the old boys' network lives on: privately educated students earn more
than those with identical qualifications educated by the state".[5]

## See also

-   [Class ring](Class_ring "wikilink") - an approximate
    [American](United_States "wikilink") equivalent

## References

[Category:Education in the United
Kingdom](Category:Education_in_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")
[Category:British culture](Category:British_culture "wikilink")
[Category:School uniform](Category:School_uniform "wikilink")
[Category:Neckties](Category:Neckties "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]