![](Hausa_from_Yola-1902.jpg "fig:Hausa_from_Yola-1902.jpg") in an
Alasho\]\]**Alasho** is an indigenous [Hausa](Hausa_people "wikilink")
long [turban](turban "wikilink"), worn across the head and neck. It is
near identical in length, colour and dimensions to that of the
[Tuareg](Tuareg "wikilink") [tagelmust](tagelmust "wikilink"),[1] but is
wrapped differently to the Tuareg method, leaving the sides of the head
and some of the lower neck free. A similar style turban is worn by
[Songhai](Songhai_people "wikilink") men, known as 'fatalaa' in
[Zarma](Zarma_language "wikilink").[2][3]

Once common throughout Hausa society as common male clothing, today it
only survives when used for important occasions or ceremonies, rite of
passage rituals to the adult age, marriage or in the inauguration of a
social leader. The Alasho veil has traditionally been manufactured in
[Kano](Kano "wikilink"), and was sold to Tuareg and Songhay clients and
traders.

## References

[Category:African clothing](Category:African_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Turbans](Category:Turbans "wikilink") [Category:Berber
culture](Category:Berber_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Scarves](Category:Scarves "wikilink") [Category:Shawls and
wraps](Category:Shawls_and_wraps "wikilink")
[Category:Tuareg](Category:Tuareg "wikilink")

[1] Andre Bourgeot, Les Sociétés Touarègues, Nomadisme, Identité,
Résistances, Paris: Karthala, 1995.

[2] The Tuareg or Kel Tamasheq: The People Who Speak Tamasheq and a
History of the Sahara. Henrietta Butler , Justin Marozzi, 2016, 208 pag.
,

[3] Tal Tamari (1998), Les castes de l'Afrique occidentale: Artisans et
musiciens endogames, Nanterre: Société d’ethnologie,