![](Jabot-PriscillaTattingBookNo2-1915.jpg "Jabot-PriscillaTattingBookNo2-1915.jpg")

A **jabot** (; from [French](French_language "wikilink") *jabot*: a
[bird's crop](Crop_(anatomy) "wikilink")) is a decorative clothing
accessory consisting of [lace](lace "wikilink") or other fabric falling
from the throat, suspended from or attached to a neckband or collar; or
simply pinned at the throat. It evolved from the
[frilling](frilling "wikilink") or ruffles decorating the front of a
shirt in the 19th century.[1]

## History

In the 17th and 18th centuries, a jabot consisted of
[cambric](cambric "wikilink") or [lace](lace "wikilink") edging sewn to
both sides of the front opening of a man's shirt, partially visible
through a [vest](vest "wikilink")/[waistcoat](waistcoat "wikilink") worn
over it. This style arose around 1650. Jabots made of lace and hanging
loose from the neck were an essential component of upper class, male
fashion in the baroque period. Examples can be seen in the movies
*[Pirates of the
Caribbean](Pirates_of_the_Caribbean_(film_series) "wikilink")* and
*[Dangerous Liaisons](Dangerous_Liaisons "wikilink")*.

In the late 19th century a jabot would be a cambric or lace bib, for
decorating women's clothing. It would be held in place at the neck with
a brooch or a sewn-on neckband.

## Today

![](ICJ-CJI_hearing_1.jpg "fig:ICJ-CJI_hearing_1.jpg") presided over by
H.E. Judge [Rosalyn Higgins](Rosalyn_Higgins "wikilink") (February/March
2006)\]\] Jabots survive in the present as components of various
official costumes. The white bibs of judges of the [Federal
Constitutional Court of
Germany](Federal_Constitutional_Court_of_Germany "wikilink") are
officially described as jabots, as are those worn by judges and
[counsel](counsel "wikilink") throughout Australian courts. Jabots are
prescribed attire for [barristers](barrister "wikilink") appearing
before the [Supreme Court of South
Australia](Supreme_Court_of_South_Australia "wikilink").

French magistrate court dress and French [academic
dress](academic_dress "wikilink") include a jabot, called *rabat*. It is
usually of plain cotton, except that of academic high officials, which
is made of lace. Jabots are worn by the judges and Advocates General of
the Court of Justice of the European Union.[2]

In the United States Supreme Court, jabots are worn by some female
justices, but are not mandatory. Both [United States Supreme
Court](United_States_Supreme_Court "wikilink") Justices [Ruth Bader
Ginsburg](Ruth_Bader_Ginsburg "wikilink") and [Sonia
Sotomayor](Sonia_Sotomayor "wikilink") often wear jabots with their
judicial robes;[3] Justice [Elena Kagan](Elena_Kagan "wikilink"), in
contrast, does not.[4]

Ginsburg has a collection of jabots from around the world.[5][6] She
stated in 2014 that she has a particular jabot that she wears when
issuing her dissents (black with gold embroidery and faceted stones), as
well as another she wears when issuing majority opinions (crocheted
yellow and cream with crystals) which was a gift from her law clerks.
Her favorite jabot (woven with white beads) is from Cape Town, South
Africa. [7][8] The [Speaker of the British House of
Commons](Speaker_of_the_British_House_of_Commons "wikilink")
traditionally wears a jabot along with a black silk and gold lace robe
and lace cuffs when in ceremonial dress.

Jabots continue to be worn as part of the highest formal Scottish
evening attire and a former part of [Scottish highland
dance](Scottish_highland_dance "wikilink") costumes from the 1930s to
the 1970s. They are usually worn with high-necked jackets or doublets
(Sheriffmuir or Montrose), often with matching cuffs for both genders
and a [fly plaid](fly_plaid "wikilink") of the same tartan as the kilt,
draped over-the-shoulder for men. Since the 1970s, a white jabot has
been part of the blue and white concert costume of South Africa's
[Drakensberg Boys' Choir](Drakensberg_Boys'_Choir "wikilink").

The jabot is part of the vestment of a [verger](verger "wikilink").

The jabot is also part of the ceremonial uniform of girl [Queen's
Scholars](Queen's_Scholars "wikilink") at [Westminster
School](Westminster_School "wikilink").[9]

## References

<references />

## External links

-

-

[Category:History of clothing
(Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:Neckties](Category:Neckties "wikilink")

[1] Caulfeild, S. F. A. *Encyclopedia of Victorian Needlework,
\[Dictionary of Needlework\]*. A. W. Cowan, London, 1882, (facsimile
edition, Dover Publications, NY, 1972) v. I A-L, pg. 274.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]