![](1953_wide_tie.jpg "fig:1953_wide_tie.jpg") A **kipper tie** is a
type of [necktie](necktie "wikilink") primarily fashionable in Britain
in the mid-1960s to late 1970s. The primary characteristics of the
kipper tie are its extreme breadth (normally ) and often garish colours
and patterns.

## Design origin

![](Jerry_Siegel_with_his_wife_&_daughter.jpg "fig:Jerry_Siegel_with_his_wife_&_daughter.jpg")
wearing kipper tie, 1970s.\]\] Wide neckties were fashionable in the
1940s: first among [Zoot suiters](Zoot_suit "wikilink") rebelling
against wartime austerity, and later as part of the "Bold Look" worn by
World War II veterans returning to civilian life.[1] Ties of this period
often featured bright colors and bold prints, including birds, animals,
and floral designs like [paisley](Paisley_(design) "wikilink"). British
comedian [Max Miller](Max_Miller_(comedian) "wikilink") was well known
for wearing suits and wide ties made from the same fabric as [aloha
shirts](aloha_shirt "wikilink").[2]

Kipper ties made a comeback among the younger generation during the late
1960s and early 70s as the thin ties and slim fitting
[Mod](mod_subculture "wikilink") suits began to be replaced by the
precursors to [disco fashion](disco_fashion "wikilink").[3] British
fashion designer [Michael Fish](Michael_Fish_(fashion) "wikilink")
designed the kipper tie in 1966 in his establishment in
[Piccadilly](Piccadilly "wikilink").[4]

## Revival

Despite the backlash against disco during the early 1980s, thinner
kipper ties continued to be worn, often with
[double-breasted](double-breasted "wikilink") ["power
suits"](Office_suit "wikilink"). The end of the 80s saw ultra-thin ties
become fashionable, together with 1950s-inspired [bolo
ties](bolo_ties "wikilink"). In the mid-1990s, kipper ties made a
comeback due to a resurgence of interest in [1970s
fashion](1970s_fashion "wikilink").[5] These were typically darker and
less [kitsch](kitsch "wikilink") than those from its heyday. By the
2000s, however, wide ties had become associated with older men, and fell
out of favour as skinny ties influenced by [indie
pop](indie_pop "wikilink") and [Mod
subculture](Mod_(subculture) "wikilink") became fashionable.[6]

## Name of the tie

It has alternately been proposed that the name "kipper tie" is a
reference to the extreme breadth of the tie resembling a
[kipper](kipper "wikilink"),[7] or a sly reference to the designer,
whose last name, Fish, was evocative of a kipper.[8]

## Notes

[Category:Neckties](Category:Neckties "wikilink")
[Category:Neckwear](Category:Neckwear "wikilink")

[1] Walker, Richard: The Savile Row Story, Prion, 1988,

[2] East, John M. (1977), Max Miller the Cheeky Chappie, London, W H
Allen,

[3] [Berg companion to
fashion](https://books.google.com/books?id=0_3qzO6NTqcC&lpg=PA534&dq=kipper%20tie&pg=PA534#v=onepage&q&f=false)

[4] Grunenberg, Christoph; and Harris, Jonathan. *Summer of Love:
Psychedelic Art, Social Crisis and Counterculture in the 1960s*.
Liverpool University Press, 2006. P. 213-214,

[5] [Handbook of gender sex and
media](https://books.google.com/books?id=ZjrXrueVe-0C&lpg=PT232&dq=kipper%20tie&pg=PT232#v=onepage&q&f=false)

[6] [Joseph gordon levitt wearing skinny
tie](http://arts.nationalpost.com/2013/09/11/tiff-red-carpet-photos-joseph-gordon-levitt-runs-onto-the-don-jon-red-carpet-in-40-degree-heat/)

[7] Schur, Norman W. *English English: A Descriptive Guide*. Verbatim
Books, 1978. P. 136.

[8] Breward, Christopher; Ehrman, Edwina; and Evans, Caroline. *The
London Look: Fashion from Street to Catwalk*. Yale University Press,
2004. P. 131.