![](HH_Polizeihauptmeister_MZ.jpg "HH_Polizeihauptmeister_MZ.jpg")

A **necktie**, or simply a **tie**, is a long piece of cloth, worn,
usually by men, for decorative purposes around the
[neck](neck "wikilink"), resting under the shirt collar and knotted at
the throat.

Variants include the [ascot tie](ascot_tie "wikilink"), [bow
tie](bow_tie "wikilink"), [bolo tie](bolo_tie "wikilink"), [zipper
tie](zipper_tie "wikilink"), [cravat](cravat "wikilink"), [Knit
Tie](Knit_Tie "wikilink") and [clip-on tie](clip-on_tie "wikilink"). The
modern necktie, ascot, and bow tie are descended from the
[cravat](cravat "wikilink"). Neckties are generally unsized, but may be
available in a longer size. In some cultures men and boys wear neckties
as part of regular office attire or [formal
wear](formal_wear "wikilink"). Some women wear them as well but usually
not as often as men. Neckties can also be worn as part of a
[uniform](uniform "wikilink") (e.g. military, school, waitstaff),
whereas some choose to wear them as everyday clothing attire. Neckties
are traditionally worn with the top shirt button fastened, and the tie
knot resting between the collar points.[1]

## History

### Origins

The necktie that spread from Europe traces back to [Croatian
mercenaries](Croats_(military_unit) "wikilink") serving in France during
the [Thirty Years' War](Thirty_Years'_War "wikilink") (1618–1648). These
mercenaries from the [Croatian Military
Frontier](Croatian_Military_Frontier "wikilink"), wearing their
traditional small, knotted neckerchiefs, aroused the interest of the
[Parisians](Paris "wikilink").[2] Because of the difference between the
[Croatian](Croatian_language "wikilink") word for Croats, , and the
French word, , the garment gained the name *[cravat](cravat "wikilink")*
( in French).[3] The boy-king [Louis XIV](Louis_XIV "wikilink") began
wearing a lace cravat around 1646, when he was seven, and set the
fashion for French nobility. This new article of clothing started a
fashion craze in Europe; both men and women wore pieces of fabric around
their necks. From its introduction by the French king, men wore
[lace](lace "wikilink") cravats, or
[jabots](Jabot_(neckwear) "wikilink"), that took a large amount of time
and effort to arrange. These cravats were often tied in place by cravat
strings, arranged neatly and tied in a bow.

International Necktie Day is celebrated on October 18 in
[Croatia](Croatia "wikilink") and in various cities around the world,
including in [Dublin](Dublin "wikilink"),
[Tübingen](Tübingen "wikilink"), [Como](Como "wikilink"),
[Tokyo](Tokyo "wikilink"), [Sydney](Sydney "wikilink") and other
towns.[4][5]

### 1680–1710: the Steinkirk

The [Battle of Steenkerque](Battle_of_Steenkerque "wikilink") took place
in 1692. In this battle, the princes, while hurriedly dressing for
battle, wound these cravats around their necks. They twisted the ends of
the fabric together and passed the twisted ends through a jacket
[buttonhole](buttonhole "wikilink"). These cravats were generally
referred to as [Steinkirks](Cravat#Steinkirk "wikilink").

### 1710–1800: stocks, solitaires, neckcloths, cravats

In 1715, another kind of neckwear, called
"[stocks](Stock_tie "wikilink")" made its appearance. The term
originally referred to a leather collar, laced at the back, worn by
soldiers to promote holding the head high in a military bearing. The
leather stock also afforded some protection to the major blood vessels
of the neck from [saber](saber "wikilink") or
[bayonet](bayonet "wikilink") attacks. General
[Sherman](William_Tecumseh_Sherman "wikilink") is seen wearing a leather
stock in several American Civil War-era photographs.

Stock ties were initially just a small piece of
[muslin](muslin "wikilink") folded into a narrow band wound a few times
round the shirt collar and secured from behind with a pin. It was
fashionable for the men to wear their hair long, past shoulder length.
The ends were tucked into a black silk bag worn at the nape of the neck.
This was known as the bag-wig hairstyle, and the neckwear worn with it
was the stock.

The solitaire was a variation of the bag wig. This form had matching
ribbons stitched around the bag. After the stock was in place, the
[ribbons](ribbon "wikilink") would be brought forward and tied in a
large bow in front of the wearer.

Sometime in the late 18th century, cravats began to make an appearance
again. This can be attributed to a group of young men called the
[macaronis](Macaroni_(fashion) "wikilink") (as mentioned in the song
"[Yankee Doodle](Yankee_Doodle "wikilink")"). These were young
Englishmen who returned from Europe and brought with them new ideas
about fashion from Italy. The French contemporaries of the macaronis
were the [incroyables](incroyables "wikilink").

### 1800–1850: cravat, stocks, scarves, bandanas

![](Man's_tailcoat_detail_with_stock_and_beaver_top_hat.jpg "fig:Man's_tailcoat_detail_with_stock_and_beaver_top_hat.jpg")ed
silk satin stock, Boston, c. 1830. [Los Angeles County Museum of
Art](Los_Angeles_County_Museum_of_Art "wikilink"), AC1998.78.1.\]\] At
this time, there was also much interest in the way to tie a proper
cravat and this led to a series of publications. This began in 1818 the
publication of with *Neckclothitania*, a style manual that contained
illustrated instructions on how to tie 14 different cravats. Soon after,
the immense skill required to tie the cravat in certain styles quickly
became a mark of a man's elegance and wealth.[6] It was also the first
book to use the word *tie* in association with neckwear.

It was about this time that black stocks made their appearance. Their
popularity eclipsed the white cravat, except for formal and evening
wear. These remained popular through to the 1850s. At this time, another
form of neckwear worn was the [scarf](scarf "wikilink"). This was where
a neckerchief or [bandana](bandana "wikilink") was held in place by
slipping the ends through a finger or scarf ring at the neck instead of
using a knot. This is the classic sailor neckwear and may have been
adopted from them.

### 1860–1920s: bow ties, scarf/neckerchief, the ascot, the long tie

![](Mathew_Brady_1875_cropped.jpg "fig:Mathew_Brady_1875_cropped.jpg")
wearing a tie in 1875\]\] With the [industrial
revolution](industrial_revolution "wikilink"), more people wanted
neckwear that was easy to put on, was comfortable, and would last an
entire workday. Neckties were designed to be long, thin and easy to
knot, without accidentally coming undone. This is the necktie design
still worn by millions of men.

By this time, the sometimes complicated array of knots and styles of
neckwear gave way to the neckties and [bow ties](bow_tie "wikilink"),
the latter a much smaller, more convenient version of the cravat.
Another type of neckwear, the [Ascot tie](Ascot_tie "wikilink"), was
considered *de rigueur* for male guests at formal dinners and male
spectators at races. These ascots had wide flaps that were crossed and
pinned together on the chest.

This was until 1926, when a New York tie maker, [Jesse
Langsdorf](Jesse_Langsdorf "wikilink") came up with a method[7] of
cutting the fabric on the [bias](bias_(textile) "wikilink") and sewing
it in three segments. This technique improved elasticity and facilitated
the fabric's return to its original shape. Since that time, most men
have worn the "Langsdorf" tie. Yet another development during that time
was the method used to secure the lining and
[interlining](Lining_(sewing) "wikilink") (known as the swan) once the
tie had been folded into shape. [Richard Atkinson and
Company](Richard_Atkinson_and_Company "wikilink") of Belfast claim to
have introduced the [slipstitch](slipstitch "wikilink") for this purpose
in the late 1920s.

### 1920s–present day

![](Tie_collection.jpg "fig:Tie_collection.jpg")
![](Krawaty.jpg "fig:Krawaty.jpg") After the [First World
War](First_World_War "wikilink"), hand-painted ties became an accepted
form of decoration in the U.S. The widths of some of these ties went up
to . These loud, flamboyant ties sold very well all the way through the
1950s.

In Britain, regimental stripes have been continuously used in tie
designs at least since the 1920s. In Commonwealth countries, necktie
stripes run from the left shoulder down to the right side. In
Commonwealth countries, only people affiliated with a regiment (or
university, school or organisation) should wear a necktie affiliated
with that regiment. When [Brooks Brothers](Brooks_Brothers "wikilink")
introduced similar striped ties in the [United
States](United_States "wikilink") around the beginning of the 20th
century, they had their stripes run from the right shoulder to the left
side, in part to distinguish them from British regimental striped
neckties.

Before the [Second World War](Second_World_War "wikilink") ties were
worn shorter than they are today; this was due, in part, to men wearing
[trousers](trousers "wikilink") at the natural waist (more or less at
the level of the belly button), and also due to the popularity of
waistcoats, where tie length is not important as long as the tips are
concealed. Around 1944, ties started to become not only wider, but even
more wild. This was the beginning of what was later labeled the [Bold
Look](1945–1960_in_fashion#Suits "wikilink"): ties that reflected the
returning GIs' desire to break with wartime uniformity. Widths reached ,
and designs included [Art Deco](Art_Deco "wikilink"), hunting scenes,
scenic "photographs", tropical themes, and even girlie prints, though
more traditional designs were also available. The typical length was .

The Bold Look lasted until about 1951, when the "Mister T" look (so
termed by [Esquire magazine](Esquire_magazine "wikilink")) was
introduced. The new style, characterized by tapered suits, slimmer
[lapels](lapel "wikilink"), and smaller [hat
brims](brim_(hat) "wikilink"), included thinner and not so wild ties.
Tie widths slimmed to by 1953 and continued getting thinner up until the
mid-1960s; length increased to about as men started wearing their
trousers lower, closer to the hips. Through the 1950s, neckties remained
somewhat colorful, yet more restrained than in the previous decade.
Small geometric shapes were often employed against a solid background
(i.e., [foulards](foulard "wikilink")); diagonal stripes were also
popular. By the early 1960s, dark, solid ties became very common, with
widths slimming down to as little as .

The 1960s brought about an influx of [pop art](pop_art "wikilink")
influenced designs. The first was designed by [Michael
Fish](Michael_Fish_(fashion) "wikilink") when he worked at [Turnbull &
Asser](Turnbull_&_Asser "wikilink"), and was introduced in Britain in
1965; the term [Kipper tie](Kipper_tie "wikilink") was a pun on his
name, as well as a reference to the triangular shape of the front of the
tie. The exuberance of the styles of the late 1960s and early 1970s
gradually gave way to more restrained designs. Ties became wider,
returning to their width, sometimes with garish colors and designs. The
traditional designs of the 1930s and 1950s, such as those produced by
[Tootal](Tootal "wikilink"), reappeared, particularly
[Paisley](Paisley_(design) "wikilink") patterns. Ties began to be sold
along with shirts, and designers slowly began to experiment with bolder
colors.

In the 1980s, narrower ties, some as narrow as but more typically wide,
became popular again. Into the 1990s, as ties got wider again,
increasingly unusual designs became common. Novelty (or joke) ties or
deliberately [kitschy](kitsch "wikilink") ties designed to make a
statement gained a certain popularity in the 1980s and 1990s. These
included ties featuring cartoon characters, [commercial
products](commercial_products "wikilink"), or [pop
culture](popular_culture "wikilink") icons, and those made of unusual
materials, such as [plastic](plastic "wikilink") or
[wood](wood "wikilink"). During this period, with men wearing their
trousers at their hips, ties lengthened to .

At the start of the 21st century, ties widened to wide, with a broad
range of patterns available, from traditional stripes, foulards, and
club ties (ties with a crest or design signifying a club, organization,
or order) to abstract, themed, and humorous ones. The standard length
remains , though other lengths vary from 117 cm to 152 cm. While ties as
wide as inches are still available, ties under wide also became popular,
particularly with younger men and the fashion-conscious. In 2008 and
2009 the world of fashion saw a return to narrower ties.

## Types

![](Neckclothitania-1818.gif "fig:Neckclothitania-1818.gif")
![](Necktie_Knots.png "fig:Necktie_Knots.png")

### Cravat

In 1660, in celebration of its hard-fought victory over the [Ottoman
Empire](Ottoman_Empire "wikilink"), a crack regiment from
[Croatia](Croatia "wikilink") visited [Paris](Paris "wikilink"). There,
the soldiers were presented as glorious heroes to [Louis
XIV](Louis_XIV_of_France "wikilink"), a monarch well known for his eye
toward personal adornment. It so happened that the officers of this
regiment were wearing brightly colored handkerchiefs fashioned of silk
around their necks. These neck cloths struck the fancy of the king, and
he soon made them an insignia of royalty as he created a regiment of
Royal Cravattes. The word "cravat" is derived from the *à la croate*—in
the style of the [Croats](Croat "wikilink").

### Four-in-hand

The four-in-hand necktie (as distinct from the [four-in-hand
knot](four-in-hand_knot "wikilink")) was fashionable in [Great
Britain](Great_Britain "wikilink") in the 1850s. Early neckties were
simple, rectangular cloth strips cut on the square, with square ends.
The term "four-in-hand" originally described a carriage with four horses
and a driver; later, it also was the name of a
[London](London "wikilink") [gentlemen's
club](gentlemen's_club "wikilink"), The Four-in-Hand Driving Company
founded in 1856. Some etymologic reports are that carriage drivers
knotted their reins with a four-in-hand knot (see
[below](#Types_of_knots "wikilink")), whilst others claim the carriage
drivers wore their scarves knotted 'four-in-hand', but, most likely,
members of the club began wearing their neckties so knotted, thus making
it fashionable. In the latter half of the 19th century, the four-in-hand
knot and the four-in-hand necktie were synonymous. As fashion changed
from stiff shirt collars to soft, turned-down collars, the four-in-hand
necktie knot gained popularity; its sartorial dominance rendered the
term "four-in-hand" redundant usage, shortened "long tie" and "tie".

In 1926, Jesse Langsdorf from [New York City](New_York_City "wikilink")
introduced ties cut on the [bias](bias_(textile) "wikilink") (US) or
[cross-grain](cross-grain "wikilink") (UK), allowing the tie to evenly
fall from the knot without twisting; this also caused any woven
[pattern](pattern "wikilink") such as stripes to appear diagonally
across the tie.

Today, four-in-hand ties are part of men's dress clothing in both
[Western](Western_world "wikilink") and non-Western societies,
particularly for business.

Four-in-hand ties are generally made from [silk](silk "wikilink") or
[polyester](polyester "wikilink") and occasionally with
[cotton](cotton "wikilink"). Another material used is
[wool](wool "wikilink"), usually knitted, common before [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink") but not as popular nowadays. More recently,
[microfiber](microfiber "wikilink") ties have also appeared; in the
1950s and 1960s, other manmade fabrics, such as
[Dacron](Dacron "wikilink") and [rayon](rayon "wikilink"), were also
used, but have fallen into disfavour. Modern ties appear in a wide
variety of colours and patterns, notably striped (usually diagonally);
club ties (with a small motif repeated regularly all over the tie);
[foulards](foulard "wikilink") (with small geometric shapes on a solid
background); [paisleys](paisley_(design) "wikilink"); and solids.
Novelty ties featuring [icons](icon_(secular) "wikilink") from popular
culture (such as cartoons, actors, or holiday images), sometimes with
flashing lights, have enjoyed some popularity since the 1980s.

### Six- and seven-fold ties

A seven-fold tie is an unlined construction variant of the four-in-hand
necktie which pre-existed the use of interlining. Its creation at the
end of the 19th century is attributed to the Parisian shirtmaker
Washington Tremlett for an American customer.[8] A seven-fold tie is
constructed completely out of silk. A six-fold tie is a modern
alteration of the seven-fold tie. This construction method is more
symmetrical than the true seven-fold. It has an interlining which gives
it a little more weight and is self tipped.

### Skinny tie

A skinny tie is a necktie that is narrower than the standard tie and
often all-black. Skinny ties have widths of around at their widest,
compared to usually for regular ties.[9] Skinny ties were first
popularized in the late 1950s and early 1960s by British bands such as
[the Beatles](the_Beatles "wikilink") and [the
Kinks](the_Kinks "wikilink"), alongside the subculture that embraced
such bands, the [mods](mod_(subculture) "wikilink"). This is because
clothes of the time evolved to become more form-fitting and
tailored.[10] They were later repopularized in the late 1970s and early
1980s by [new wave](new_wave_music "wikilink") and [power
pop](power_pop "wikilink") bands such as [the
Knack](the_Knack "wikilink"), [Blondie](Blondie_(band) "wikilink") and
[Duran Duran](Duran_Duran "wikilink").[11]

### "Pre-tied" ties and development of clip-ons

![](EarlyClipOnTiePatentIllustrnJWaehner1875_US170651.png "fig:EarlyClipOnTiePatentIllustrnJWaehner1875_US170651.png")
The "pre-tied", or more commonly, the clip-on, necktie is a permanently
knotted four-in-hand or bow tie affixed by a clip or hook, most often
metal and sometimes hinged, to the shirt front without the aid of a band
around a shirt collar; these ties are close relatives of banded pre-tied
ties that make use of a collar band and a hook and eye to secure them.
The clip-on tie sees use with children, and in occupations where a
traditional necktie might pose a safety hazard, e.g., [law
enforcement](Police "wikilink"), mechanical equipment operators etc.[12]
(see below).

The perceived utility of this development in the history of style is
evidenced by the series of patents issued for various forms of these
ties, beginning in the late 19th century,[13][14] and by the businesses
filing these applications and fulfilling a market need for them. For
instance, a patent filed by Joseph W. Less of the *One-In-Hand Tie
Company* of Clinton, Iowa for "Pre-tied neckties and methods for making
the same" noted that:

![](Clip-On_Tie.jpg "Clip-On_Tie.jpg")

The Inventor proceeded to claim for the invention—the latest version of
a 1930s–1950s product line from former concert violinist Joseph Less,
Iowan brothers Walter and Louis, and son-in-law W. Emmett Thiessen
evolved to be identifiable as the modern clip-on[15]—"a novel method for
making up the tie ... \[eliminating\] the neckband of the tie, which is
useless and uncomfortable in warm weather ... \[and providing\] means of
attachment which is effective and provides no discomfort to the wearer",
and in doing so achieves "accurate simulation of the Windsor knot, and
extremely low material and labor costs".[16] Notably, the company made
use of ordinary ties purchased from the New York garment industry, and
was a significant employers of women in the pre-war and World War II
years.[17]

While the appeal of the pre-tied ties from the perspective of fashion
has flowed and ebbed, varieties of clip-on long ties and banded bow ties
are still the most common form of child-sized ties in the opening decade
of the 21st century.

## Types of knot

![](How_to_tie_a_Cravat.ogv "fig:How_to_tie_a_Cravat.ogv")

![](Tie_dimple.jpg "fig:Tie_dimple.jpg")
![](Necktie_Atlantic_knot.jpg "fig:Necktie_Atlantic_knot.jpg") There are
four main [knots](knot "wikilink") used to knot neckties. In rising
order of difficulty, they are:

-   the [four-in-hand knot](four-in-hand_knot "wikilink"). The
    four-in-hand knot may be the most common.
-   the [Pratt knot](Pratt_knot "wikilink") (the Shelby knot)
-   the [half-Windsor knot](half-Windsor_knot "wikilink")
-   the [Windsor knot](Windsor_knot "wikilink") (also redundantly called
    the "full Windsor"). The Windsor knot is the thickest knot of the
    four, since its tying has the most steps.

The Windsor knot is named after the [Duke of
Windsor](Edward_VIII_of_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink"), although he did
not invent it. The Duke did favour a voluminous knot; however, he
achieved this by having neckties specially made of thicker cloths.

In the late 1990s, two researchers, [Thomas
Fink](Thomas_Fink "wikilink") and [Yong Mao](Yong_Mao "wikilink") of
[Cambridge's](University_of_Cambridge "wikilink") [Cavendish
Laboratory](Cavendish_Laboratory "wikilink"), used mathematical modeling
to discover that 85 knots are possible with a conventional tie (limiting
the number "moves" used to tie the knot to nine; longer sequences of
moves result in too large a knot or leave the hanging ends of the tie
too short). The models were published in academic journals, while the
results and the 85 knots were published in layman's terms in a book
entitled *[The 85 Ways to Tie a
Tie](The_85_Ways_to_Tie_a_Tie "wikilink")*.[18] Of the 85 knots, Fink
and Mao selected 13 knots as "aesthetic" knots, using the qualities of
symmetry and balance. Based on these mathematical principles, the
researchers came up with not only the four necktie knots in common use,
but nine more, some of which had seen limited use, and some that are
believed to have been codified for the first time.

Other types of knots include:

-   the **[small knot](small_knot "wikilink")** (also "oriental knot",
    "Kent knot"): the smallest possible necktie knot. It forms an
    equilateral triangle, like the half-Windsor, but much more compact
    (Fink–Mao notation: Lo Ri Co T, Knot 1). It is also the smallest
    knot to begin inside-out.
-   the **[Nicky knot](Pratt_knot "wikilink")**: an alternative version
    of the Pratt knot, but better-balanced and self-releasing (Lo Ci Ro
    Li Co T, Knot 4). Supposedly named for [Nikita
    Khrushchev](Nikita_Khrushchev "wikilink"), it tends to be equally
    referred to as the Pratt knot in men's style literature. This is the
    version of the Pratt knot favored by Fink and Mao.
-   the **Atlantic knot**: a reversed Pratt knot, highlighting the
    structure of the knot normally hidden on the back. In order for the
    wide blade to remain in front and rightside-out, the knot must begin
    rightside-out, and the thin end must be wrapped around the wide end.
    (Ri Co Ri Lo Ci T; not catalogued by Fink and Mao, but would be
    numbered 5<sup>r</sup> according to their classification.)
-   the **Prince Albert knot** (also "double knot", "cross Victoria
    knot"): A variant of the four-in-hand with an extra pass of the wide
    blade around the front, before passing the wide blade through both
    of the resultant loops (Li Ro Li Ro Li Co T T, Knot 6<sub>2</sub>).
    A version knotted through only the outermost loop is known as the
    **Victoria knot** (Li Ro Li Ro Li Co T, Knot 6).
-   the **Christensen knot** (also "cross knot"): An elongated,
    symmetrical knot, whose main feature is the cruciform structure made
    by knotting the necktie through the double loop made in the front
    (Li Ro Ci Lo Ri Lo Ri Co T T, Knot 25<sub>2</sub>). While it can be
    made with modern neckties, it is most effective with thinner ties of
    consistent width, which fell out of common use after the 19th
    century.
-   the **Ediety knot** (also "Merovingian knot"): a doubled Atlantic
    knot, best known as the tie knot worn by the character "[the
    Merovingian](List_of_minor_characters_in_the_Matrix_series#Merovingian "wikilink")"
    in the 2003 film *[The Matrix
    Reloaded](The_Matrix_Reloaded "wikilink")*. This tie can be knotted
    with the thin end over the wide end, as with the Atlantic knot, or
    with the wide end over the thin end to mimic the look seen in the
    film, with the narrow blade in front. (Ri Co Ri Lo Ci Ri Co Ri Lo Ci
    T – not catalogued by Fink and Mao, as its 10 moves exceed their
    parameters.)

## Ties as a sign of membership

![](Andover_ties.JPG "fig:Andover_ties.JPG")\]\] The use of coloured and
patterned neckties indicating the wearer's membership in a club,
military regiment, school, professional association (Royal Colleges,
Inns of Courts) et cetera, dates only from late-19th century
[England](England "wikilink").[19] The immediate forerunners of today's
college neckties were in 1880 the [oarsmen](Sport_rowing "wikilink") of
[Exeter College, Oxford](Exeter_College_Boat_Club "wikilink"), who tied
the bands of their straw hats around their necks.[20][21]

In the [United Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink") and many
[Commonwealth](Commonwealth_of_Nations "wikilink") countries, neckties
are an essential component of the school uniform and are either worn
daily, seasonally or on special occasions with the school blazer. In
[Hong Kong](Hong_Kong "wikilink"), [Australia](Australia "wikilink") and
[New Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink"), neckties are worn as the everyday
uniform, usually as part of the winter uniform. In countries with no
winter such as [Sri Lanka](Sri_Lanka "wikilink"),
[Singapore](Singapore "wikilink"), [Malaysia](Malaysia "wikilink") and
many African countries, the necktie is usually worn as part of the
formal uniform on special occasions or functions. Neckties may also
denote membership of a [house](House_system "wikilink") or a leadership
role (i.e. school prefect, house captain, etc.).

The most common pattern for such ties in the UK and most of Europe
consists of diagonal stripes of alternating colours running down the tie
from the wearer's left. Note that neckties are cut on the bias
(diagonally), so the stripes on the source cloth are parallel or
perpendicular to the selvage, not diagonal. The colours themselves may
be particularly significant. The dark blue and red regimental tie of the
[Household Division](Household_Division "wikilink") is said to represent
the blue blood (i.e. [nobility](nobility "wikilink")) of the Royal
Family, and the red blood of the Guards.

In the United States, diagonally striped ties are commonly worn with no
connotation of group membership. Typically, American striped ties have
the stripes running downward from the wearer's right (the opposite of
the European style).[22] However, when Americans wear striped ties as a
sign of membership, the European stripe style may be used.

An alternative membership tie pattern to diagonal stripes is either a
single emblem or a crest centered and placed where a [tie
pin](tie_pin "wikilink") normally would be, or a repeated pattern of
such motifs. Sometimes, both types are used by an organization, either
simply to offer a choice or to indicate a distinction among levels of
membership. Occasionally, a hybrid design is used, in which alternating
stripes of colour are overlaid with repeated motif pattern.

## Use by women

![](Indian_school_children_at_Hnahthial.jpg "fig:Indian_school_children_at_Hnahthial.jpg")
schoolgirls in [Mizoram](Mizoram "wikilink") wearing neckties as part of
the [school uniform](school_uniform "wikilink")\]\]
![](GertrudeVanWagenen.jpg "fig:GertrudeVanWagenen.jpg") wearing a suit
& tie.\]\] Neckties are sometimes part of uniforms worn by women, which
nowadays might be required in professions such as restaurants and police
forces. In many countries, girls are nowadays required to wear ties as
part of primary and secondary school [uniforms](uniform "wikilink").

Ties may also be used by women as a fashion statement. During the late
1970s and 1980s, it was not uncommon for young women in the [United
States](United_States "wikilink") to wear ties as part of a casual
outfit.[23][24] This trend was popularized by [Diane
Keaton](Diane_Keaton "wikilink") who wore a tie as the titular character
in *[Annie Hall](Annie_Hall "wikilink")* in 1977.[25][26]

In 1993, neckties reappeared as prominent fashion accessories for women
in both Europe and the U.S.[27] Canadian recording artist [Avril
Lavigne](Avril_Lavigne "wikilink") wore neckties with tank tops early in
her career.

## Occasions for neckties

Traditionally, ties are a staple of office attire, especially for
professionals. Proponents of the tie's place in the office assert that
ties neatly demarcate work and leisure time.[28]

The theory is that the physical presence of something around your neck
serves as a reminder to knuckle down and focus on the job at hand.
Conversely, loosening of the tie after work signals that one can
relax.[29] However, some tech companies have gone the other way and
banned neckties in the office, such as in Google, Amazon, Apple, and
Ikea.

Richard Branson, founder of Virgin Group, believes ties are a symbol of
oppression and slavery.[30]

Outside of these environments, ties are usually worn especially when
attending traditionally formal or professional events, including
weddings, important religious ceremonies, funerals, job interviews,
court appearances, and fine dining.[31]

## Opposition to neckties

The debate between proponents and opponents of the necktie center on
social conformity, plainness, professional expectation, and personal,
sartorial expression. Quoting architect [Louis
Sullivan](Louis_Sullivan "wikilink"), [Frank Lloyd
Wright](Frank_Lloyd_Wright "wikilink") said: "[Form follows
function](Form_follows_function "wikilink")". Applied sartorially, the
necktie's decorative function is so criticized.

### Christian denominations teaching plain dress

Among many [Christian denominations](Christian_denomination "wikilink")
teaching the doctrine of [plain dress](plain_dress "wikilink"), long
neckties are not worn by men; this includes many
[Anabaptist](Anabaptist "wikilink") communities (such as the
[Conservative Mennonite
Conference](Conservative_Mennonite_Conference "wikilink")), [traditional
Quakers](Conservative_Friends "wikilink") (who view neckties as
contravening their [testimony of
simplicity](testimony_of_simplicity "wikilink")), and some [Holiness
Methodists](holiness_movement "wikilink") (such as the [Reformed Free
Methodists](Reformed_Free_Methodist "wikilink") who view neckties as
conflicting with the belief in [outward
holiness](outward_holiness "wikilink")).[32][33][34][35]

Other Holiness Methodist denominations, such as the [Evangelical
Wesleyan Church](Evangelical_Wesleyan_Church "wikilink"), allow a long
necktie that is black in colour. While [Reformed
Mennonites](Reformed_Mennonite "wikilink"), among some other Anabaptist
communities, reject the long necktie, the wearing of the [bow
tie](bow_tie "wikilink") is customary.[36]

### Anti-necktie sentiment

In the early 20th century, the number of office workers began
increasing. Many such men and women were required to wear neckties,
because it was perceived as improving work attitudes, morale, and sales.
Removing the necktie as a social and sartorial business requirement (and
sometimes forbidding it) is a modern trend often attributed to the rise
of popular culture. Although it was common as everyday wear as late as
1966, over the years 1967–69, the necktie fell out of fashion almost
everywhere, except where required. There was a resurgence in the 1980s,
but in the 1990s, ties again fell out of favor, with many
technology-based companies having casual dress requirements, including
[Apple](Apple_Inc. "wikilink"), [Amazon](Amazon_(company) "wikilink"),
[eBay](eBay "wikilink"), [Genentech](Genentech "wikilink"),
[Microsoft](Microsoft "wikilink"), [Monsanto](Monsanto "wikilink"), and
[Google](Google "wikilink").[37]

In western business culture, a phenomenon known as [Casual
Friday](Casual_Friday "wikilink") has arisen, in which employees are not
required to wear ties on Fridays, and then—increasingly—on other,
announced, special days. Some businesses have extended casual-dress days
to Thursday, and even Wednesday; others require neckties only on Monday
(to start the work week). At the furniture company
[IKEA](IKEA "wikilink"), neckties are not allowed.[38]

An example of anti-necktie sentiment is found in
[Iran](Iran "wikilink"), whose [theocratic](Islamic_Republic "wikilink")
rulers have denounced the [accessory](Fashion_accessory "wikilink") as a
decadent symbol of European oppression. In the late 1970s (at the time
of the [Islamic Revolution](Iranian_Revolution "wikilink")), members of
the [US press](News_media_(United_States) "wikilink") even
[metonymized](metonym "wikilink") Iran's
[hardliners](hardline "wikilink") as *[turbans](turban "wikilink")* and
its [moderates](moderate "wikilink") as *neckties*. To date, most
Iranian men in Iran have retained the Western-style long-sleeved
collared shirt and [three-piece suit](three-piece_suit "wikilink"),
while excluding the necktie. The majority of Iranian men abroad wear
neckties.[39]

Neckties are viewed by various sub- and counter-culture movements as
being a symbol of submission and slavery (i.e., having a symbolic chain
around one's neck) to the corrupt elite of society, as a "[wage
slave](wage_slave "wikilink")".[40]

For 60 years, designers and manufacturers of neckties in the United
States were members of the [Men's Dress Furnishings
Association](Men's_Dress_Furnishings_Association "wikilink") but the
trade group shut down in 2008 as a result of declining membership due to
the declining numbers of men wearing neckties.[41]

In 2019, Presidential candidate [Andrew Yang](Andrew_Yang "wikilink")
drew attention when he appeared on televised Presidential debates
without a tie. Yang welcomed the attention and suggested that voters
should be focused on more important issues. [42][43]

## Health and safety hazards

![](DIN_4844-2_D-P027.svg "fig:DIN_4844-2_D-P027.svg") Necktie wearing
presents some risks for entanglement, infection, and
[vasoconstriction](vasoconstriction "wikilink"). A 2018 study published
in the medical journal *Neuroradiology* found that a [Windsor
knot](Windsor_knot "wikilink") tightened to the point of "slight
discomfort" could interrupt as much as 7.5 percent of cerebral blood
flow.[44][45] A 2013 study published in the *[British Journal of
Ophthalmology](British_Journal_of_Ophthalmology "wikilink")* found
increased intraocular pressure in such cases, which can aggravate the
condition of people with weakened retinas.[46] There may be additional
risks for people with [glaucoma](glaucoma "wikilink").

Entanglement is a risk when working with machinery or in dangerous,
possibly violent, jobs such as police officers and prison guards, and
certain medical fields.[47]

![](HECOX,_C.W._INSTRUCTOR_IN_MACHINE_SHOP,_D.C._PUBLIC_SCHOOLS._SUPERVISING_MFR._OF_PRACTICE_SHELLS_FOR_NAVY,_AT_McKINLEY_TRAINING_SCHOOL.jpg "fig:HECOX,_C.W._INSTRUCTOR_IN_MACHINE_SHOP,_D.C._PUBLIC_SCHOOLS._SUPERVISING_MFR._OF_PRACTICE_SHELLS_FOR_NAVY,_AT_McKINLEY_TRAINING_SCHOOL.jpg")
and his supervisor wear neckties while at work in a [machine
shop](machine_shop "wikilink") in 1917. In a modern setting,
["professional" dress](Informal_wear "wikilink") would likely be
superseded by more practical clothing due to the risk of a dangling
necktie becoming entangled in moving machinery.\]\]

Paramedics performing [life support](Basic_life_support "wikilink")
remove an injured man's necktie as a first step to ensure it does not
block his airway. Neckties might also be a health risk for persons other
than the wearer. They are believed to be vectors in disease transmission
in hospitals. Notwithstanding such fears, many doctors and dentists wear
neckties for a professional image. Hospitals take seriously the
cross-infection of patients by doctors wearing infected neckties,[48]
because neckties are less frequently cleaned than most other clothes. On
September 17, 2007, British hospitals published rules banning
neckties.[49] In such a context, some instead prefer to use bow ties due
to their short length and relative lack of hindrance.

In the UK, it is a popular prank to pull someone's tie so that it
tightens. This prank, known as "peanutting" or "squatknotting", is often
used to embarrass the victim and can also be used for more severe
bullying. In March 2008, a 13-year-old boy from Oxted, in Surrey, was
rushed into hospital with spinal injuries after being "peanuted". He was
kept hospitalized for three days.[50]

## See also

-   [Ascot tie](Ascot_tie "wikilink")
-   [Bolo tie](Bolo_tie "wikilink")
-   [Bow tie](Bow_tie "wikilink")
-   [Cravat](Cravat "wikilink")
-   [History of Western fashion](History_of_Western_fashion "wikilink")
-   [Panama hat](Panama_hat "wikilink")
-   [Prince Claus of the
    Netherlands](Prince_Claus_of_the_Netherlands "wikilink") and the
    "Declaration of the Tie"
-   [Knit Tie](Knit_Tie "wikilink")
-   [Tie chain](Tie_chain "wikilink")
-   [Tie clip](Tie_clip "wikilink")
-   [Tie press](Tie_press "wikilink"), a device used to combat creasing
    in ties without heat-related damage.

## References

## Further reading

-

-

-

## External links

-

-

[\*](Category:Neckties "wikilink")
[Category:Neckwear](Category:Neckwear "wikilink") [Category:Croatian
inventions](Category:Croatian_inventions "wikilink") [Category:History
of clothing (Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:Articles containing video
clips](Category:Articles_containing_video_clips "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] [18TH OCTOBER – THE CRAVAT
DAY!](http://academia-cravatica.hr/news/detaljnije/18th_october_the_cravat_day/)
. Academia-cravatica.hr (October 18, 2003). Retrieved on 2013-08-08.

[5] [Tie Talk](http://tietalk.vpweb.com.au/Aboutme.html).
Tietalk.vpweb.com.au (June 30, 2010). Retrieved on 2013-08-08.

[6]

[7] J.E. Langsdorf, 1923, Necktie,

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12] [Agricultural Safety: Preventing Injuries B
1255](https://web.archive.org/web/20120606005445/http://www.caes.uga.edu/publications/pubDetail.cfm?pk_ID=7337).
The University of Georgia College of Agricultural and Environmental
Sciences

[13] Waehner, Johann (1875) "Improvement in neck-tie fasteners"
(hook-type of clip-on)

[14] Jacobowitz, Mayer (1896) "Necktie" (band-toe attachment)

[15] The beginning of the effort apparently was a version that used a
pre-knotted design and slipped the tie's narrow end through "slot" in
back of the knot.

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22] Dickinson, Rachel J. (June 18, 2004). "Ties have a history of
hanging around." *[The Cincinnati
Post](The_Cincinnati_Post "wikilink")*.

[23]

[24]

[25] "Calender." Seventeen Nov. 2002: 24.

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31] Eminence Cufflinks \|date=2016-05-15\|newspaper=Eminence
Cufflinks\|language=en-US\|access-date=2016-12-02}}

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39] Ignatius, David (July 10, 2008). [Tehran's Definite
'Maybe'](https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/07/09/AR2008070901935_pf.html).
*[The Washington Post](The_Washington_Post "wikilink")*.

[40] Bragg, Roy (May 24, 2003). "Tying one on in the office." *[San
Antonio Express](San_Antonio_Express-News "wikilink")*.

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50] [Boy was in hospital after 'peanut' tie
prank](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-551408/Boy-hospital-peanut-tie-prank.html).
*[Daily Mail](Daily_Mail "wikilink")*. March 31, 2008.