![](InviernoenlaciudadRDFeb84.jpg "fig:InviernoenlaciudadRDFeb84.jpg").\]\]
A **rebozo** is a long flat garment worn mostly by women in
[Mexico](Mexico "wikilink"). It can be worn in various ways, usually
folded or wrapped around the head and/or upper body to shade from the
sun, provide warmth and as an accessory to an outfit. It is also used to
carry babies and large bundles, especially among indigenous women. The
origin of the garment is unclear, but most likely derived in the early
colonial period, as traditional versions of the garment show indigenous,
European and Asian influences. Traditional rebozos are handwoven from
cotton, wool, silk and rayon in various lengths but all have some kind
of pattern (usually from the [ikat](ikat "wikilink") method of dying)
and have [fringe](fringe_(trim) "wikilink"), which can be [finger
weaved](fingerweaving "wikilink") into complicated designs. The garment
is considered to be part of Mexican identity and nearly all Mexican
women own at least one. It has been prominently worn by women such as
[Frida Kahlo](Frida_Kahlo "wikilink"), actress [María
Félix](María_Félix "wikilink") and former Mexican first lady [Margarita
Zavala](Margarita_Zavala "wikilink") and still popular in rural areas of
the country. However, its use has diminished in urban areas.

## Description and use of garment

![](Mujer_en_el_mercado.JPG "fig:Mujer_en_el_mercado.JPG")
![](Tealrebozo.jpg "fig:Tealrebozo.jpg") A rebozo is a long straight
piece of cloth which looks like a cross between a scarf and a shawl.
Like [ponchos](poncho "wikilink"), [huipils](huipil "wikilink") and
[sarapes](sarape "wikilink") they are classic Mexican garments made of
straight, mostly uncut cloth, but rebozos have their own
characteristics.[1] It is classically a woman's garment, traditionally
hand woven, distinguished by complicated finger woven fringes called
rapacejos.[2][3] The wearing of the rebozo is said to make the movement
of a woman more graceful.[4] The wearing of a rebozo by many women is a
sign of Mexican heritage, and for that reason, sales of the garment can
double before [Mexican Independence
Day](Mexican_Independence_Day "wikilink") on September 16.[5][6] Because
of the nature of the garment, especially the fringes, they should be
hand washed. The dye may or may not be colorfast so mild soap should be
used.[7]
![](FeriadeRebozo2014_25.JPG "fig:FeriadeRebozo2014_25.JPG")\]\] While
all rebozos are rectangular woven cloth with fringes, there is
significant variation within these constraints. There are three classes
of rebozos. Traditional ones have a design created with the ikat dying
technique and come in various set patterns. Regional rebozos are more
colorful and their origins can be identified, especially those from
[Oaxaca](Oaxaca "wikilink"), [Chiapas](Chiapas "wikilink") and
[Guerrero](Guerrero "wikilink"). Contemporary rebozos experiment with
non-traditional fibres and designs.[8] Sizes vary with lengths varying
anywhere from 1.5 to about 3.5 meters long.[9][10][11] Most Mexican
rebozos are made from cotton, wool, silk or
[rayon](rayon "wikilink").[12][13] The type of fibre used is the main
factor in determining a price of a piece which can vary from a couple
hundred pesos to thousands of pesos, with fine pure silk pieces being
the most expensive.[14][15] The finest silk rebozos can be passed
through a wedding ring.[16][17]
![](StreetvendorRebozo03.JPG "fig:StreetvendorRebozo03.JPG") Rebozo
colors and patterns vary widely and traditional designs can usually
identify where it was made.[18] For example, a tightly woven black and
[indigo](indigo "wikilink") version is identified with the mountains
areas of the state of [Michoacán](Michoacán "wikilink").[19] Designs are
generally classified as “classic” and “indigenous.” Classic rebozos come
in various colors with designs based on the pre Hispanic art of
plumaría, or creating images with feathers. Some of these have their
fringes knotted to form images of animals and stares. However, almost
all are created with the ikat technique.[20][21] The most famous classic
rebozo style is called “de bolitas” whose name comes from little knots
of string tied onto groups of threads used in its production.[22] Among
indigenous groups designs and colors almost always indicate with group
the woman belongs.[23] While most rebozos use more than one color,
monochrome versions are called “chalinas.”[24]
![](FeriadeRebozo2014_16.JPG "fig:FeriadeRebozo2014_16.JPG")

Rebozos have two main functions, that of a garment and that as a
carrying aid. As a garment, it can be an indispensable part of the
wardrobe of many mestizo and indigenous women, especially those who live
in rural areas.[25][26] As a [shawl](shawl "wikilink"), it can provide
warmth (especially the thicker and wool ones), worn on the head to block
the sun as well as for modesty, especially in church.[27][28] For city
and upper class women who use them, they can be worn inside the home but
are most often used as an accessory to an outfit, especially on certain
occasions.[29][30] As a carrying aid, it can be tied around the head or
shoulders most often to carry small children and large bundles, mostly
commonly among indigenous women.[31][32] The rebozo has even figured
into Mexican traditional medicine. It has been used as a
[tourniquet](tourniquet "wikilink"), as support for a woman in later
pregnancy, as an aid to a woman in labor, supporting her allowing for
rhythmic movements and positioning with aim of making childbirth easier.
It can also be used to alleviate headaches by tying it tightly around
the head.[33] Other uses for the rebozo have been in indigenous
traditional dances and even as a shroud.[34][35] One modern and
innovative way to wear it has been to twist it around the upper body and
fastened to make a kind of blouse or top.[36]

## History

![](Redandwhiterebozo.jpg "fig:Redandwhiterebozo.jpg") The name comes
from Spanish, from the verb that means to cover or envelope oneself.[37]
However, there have been indigenous names for it as well, such as “ciua
nequealtlapacholoni” in colonial era [Nahuatl](Nahuatl "wikilink"),
which means “that which touches a woman or something like her,”
“mini-mahua” among the [Otomis](Otomi_people "wikilink") and in the
Nahuatl of [Hueyapan](Hueyapan "wikilink"),
[Morelos](Morelos "wikilink"), it is called “cenzotl” comes from a
phrase that means “cloth of a thousand colors.”[38]

The origin of the rebozo is not known, but probably had its beginnings
in the very early colonial period.[39][40] The first mention and
description of the garment in written records is in 1572 by Friar Diego
Duran, according to research done by Ruth D. Lechuga.[41] The rebozo
itself shows various influences, which probably come from the various
cultures that had contact at that time.[42][43] There are various
indigenous garments that share physical characteristics with the rebozo.
They include the ayate, a rough cloth of [maguey](maguey "wikilink")
fibre used to carry cargo, the mamatl, which is a cotton cloth also used
to carry objects and which often had a decorative border, and the
[tilma](tilmàtli "wikilink") (used for carrying and as a garment), a
cloth best known from the one [Juan Diego](Juan_Diego "wikilink") wore
and which bears the image of the [Virgin of
Guadalupe](Virgin_of_Guadalupe "wikilink").[44][45] There are chronicles
that say that [La Malinche](La_Malinche "wikilink") carried a cloth
called a “Manta del sol” (sun cloth) which was not just used to protect
from the sun but also to denote status as decoration.[46] However, pre
Hispanic clothing and other cloths did not have woven fringes.[47] The
main European influence is most likely the Spanish
[mantilla](mantilla "wikilink"), although a southern Spanish garment
called a rebociño (introduced to the area by the
[Moors](Moors "wikilink")) may have also played a part. Later influences
probably came from Asia with the start of trade from the [Manila
Galleon](Manila_Galleon "wikilink").[48][49]

![](Ana-Castillo.png "fig:Ana-Castillo.png") Its origin was most likely
among the lower, mestizo classes in the early colonial period, being
most prominent among them first.[50][51] The most traditional rebozos
show coloring and designs from the colonial period and mestizo women
probably wore them to distinguish themselves from indigenous women but
could not afford Spanish finery.[52][53] In 1625, [Thomas
Gage](Thomas_Gage "wikilink") noted that blacks and mixed race people in
Mexico wore wide strips of clothes on their head instead of the Spanish
mantilla.[54] In the colonial period how it was worn distinguished
married women from single. Married women wore it loose covering the top
of the head down over the back. Single women would wrap it tighter,
allowing more of the back to be seen.[55] These garment were initially
made of cotton but by later in the colonial period, they were also made
of wool and silk.[56] Their use eventually spread into indigenous
communities becoming an integral part of many women's attire and
culture. For example, an Otomi woman used to dip a point of her rebozo
into water to indicate that she was thinking of her betrothed or
husband.[57][58] One important use for the garment in colonial times to
the 19th century was for women to cover their heads in church.[59] After
its initial development in Mexico, its use spread south into [Central
America](Central_America "wikilink") and even as far as
[Ecuador](Ecuador "wikilink").[60]

The rebozo was in common use among the middle and lower classes by the
18th century, with the kind of fibre used to weave it distinguishing the
two. The garment was in common use among women by the 18th century. At
that time the [Count of
Revillagigedo](Juan_Vicente_de_Güemes,_2nd_Count_of_Revillagigedo "wikilink")
noted that it was worn by all women except nuns and those of the
uppermost classes.[61][62] The two most common fibres were cotton and
the more expensive cotton/silk or silk. Sizes and designs varied but
those made with the ikat dying technique became dominant.[63] In some
parts of Mexico, a woman was given a rebozo by a man as a way to propose
matrimony instead of a ring.[64] The finest rebozos included ornate
embroidery including silver and gold thread. One fashion of that century
was to embroider country scenes.[65][66]

In 1886, a synthetic silk called [rayon](rayon "wikilink") was created
in France. The use of this cheaper thread made decorative rebozos more
affordable.[67] Its use as an identifying marker of Mexican identity
began at this time as well with even the [Empress
Carlota](Empress_Carlota "wikilink") wearing it on various formal
occasions, especially while at her country home in
[Cuernavaca](Cuernavaca "wikilink").[68] By the end of the 19th century,
the garment had become indispensable and their making an important
handcraft.[69]

Its symbolic function continued into the [Mexican
Revolution](Mexican_Revolution "wikilink"), and item associated with
rebel women called “Adelitas,” who carried both babies and weapons
wrapped inside past federal checkpoints.[70][71] During this time, the
rebozo was also often used as a shroud for the dead. Much of the world's
familiarity with the rebozo comes from later cinematic depictions of
Adelitas, but it also accentuated the garment's use with indigenous
women, poverty and low socioeconomic station.[72]

<img src="Michelle_Obama_in_Mexico_2010.jpg" title="fig:Michelle_Obama_in_Mexico_2010.jpg" width="150" alt="Michelle_Obama_in_Mexico_2010.jpg" />
with First Lady of the United States [Michelle
Obama](Michelle_Obama "wikilink"), April 2010.\]\] Today, the rebozo can
be found in all parts of Mexico and just about all women in the country
own at least one regardless of socioeconomic class.[73][74][75] In many
villages, women are still born in them, grow up with them, get married
with them and are buried in them.[76] It is still commonly worn in
church by rural women.[77] During the 20th century, the rebozo came to
be seen as both a sign of modesty/tradition and of revolution including
in some communities in the United States. For women of the
[Chicano](Chicano "wikilink") movement, it represented the “complete
woman” as both feminine and strong, ready to fight for “the Cause.”[78]
Personalities which have prominently worn rebozos include [María
Félix](María_Félix "wikilink"), [Frida Kahlo](Frida_Kahlo "wikilink"),
[Lila Downs](Lila_Downs "wikilink") and model [Luly
Jáuregui](Luly_Jáuregui "wikilink") as well as former Mexican First Lady
[Margarita Zavala](Margarita_Zavala "wikilink") who was noted for
wearing the garment at state functions.[79][80] The rebozo has appeared
in popular culture and media as well as literature.[81] During [Mexican
cinema's Golden Age](Golden_Age_of_Mexican_cinema "wikilink") the
garment appeared in many movies including one named “El Rebozo de
Soledad” (Soledad's Rebozo).[82] A de bolita patterned rebozo is
mentioned in one of [Francisco Gabilondo
Soler](Francisco_Gabilondo_Soler "wikilink")’s famous children's
songs.[83] ![](Rebozo.jpg "fig:Rebozo.jpg") However, despite its status
as a national symbol, its use has diminished among women, especially
those in cities.[84] One reason for this is that the garment is
associated with indigenous groups and poverty and another is that the
fine handwoven rebozos, especially of silk are very expensive because of
the skilled labor required.[85][86] (tenancingohis) Many of the most
expensive rebozos are no longer made in many parts of the country, with
the exceptions of [Santa María del
Río](Santa_María_del_Río,_San_Luis_Potosí "wikilink") and the [city of
San Luis Potosí](San_Luis_Potosí,_San_Luis_Potosí "wikilink").[87] The
number of weavers of all types of rebozos have diminished. For example,
there are only fifty in the entire state of
[Jalisco](Jalisco "wikilink"), almost all concentrated in a few
municipalities such as [Sayula](Sayula,_Jalisco "wikilink") and
[Tuxpan](Tuxpan,_Jalisco "wikilink").[88]

Efforts have been made to preserve and promote the use of the rebozo in
various ways. In 1953, the Escuela de Rebozo (Rebozo School) was
established to teach the weaving techniques used. In 2002 the school won
the Premio Nacional de Artes y Tradiciones Populares. Other institutions
dedicated to the craft are Museo de Rebozo in [La
Piedad](La_Piedad "wikilink"), Michoacan, the Tejedoras de la Tercera
Edad, run by [CONACULTA](CONACULTA "wikilink") in [Acatlán,
Veracruz](Acatlán,_Veracruz "wikilink") and the Taller de Rebocería in
the Casa de la Cultura in [Tenancingo, State of
Mexico](Tenancingo,_State_of_Mexico "wikilink").[89] Since the 1940s,
various techniques have been used to modernize the design of the
garment, including the use of [sequins](sequin "wikilink").[90] Some
modern Mexican fashion designers like Lydia Lavín and Monserrat
Messeguer have designed modern versions of the garment, using new
fabrics and international patterns, such as those from the Oriente and
Africa.[91]

Rebozos have been the center of museum, cultural and fashion events in
Mexico.[92] Various fairs and festivals dedicated to the garment are
held in places such as
[Matamoros](Matamoros,_Tamaulipas "wikilink"),[93] Jiquilpan,[94]
Tenancingo,[95] and [Zapopan](Zapopan "wikilink").[96] The first
Concurso Nacional del Rebozo (National Rebozo Contest) was held in San
Luis Potosí in 2004.[97] The [Universidad del Valle de
Atemajac](Universidad_del_Valle_de_Atemajac "wikilink"), Campus La
Piedad created a video called “El Arte del Rebozo” to promote the
garment both online and at international events.[98] The university held
a conference with the same name in 2012.[99] For the 100th anniversary
celebrations of the Mexican Revolution in
[Coyoacán](Coyoacán "wikilink"), Mexico City, the rebozo was featured
prominently.[100] The [Museo Nacional de Culturas
Populares](Museo_Nacional_de_Culturas_Populares "wikilink") in Mexico
City held an event called “Tápame con tu rebozo” in 2012, to promote the
use and sale of the garment.[101] Exhibitions of rebozos have also been
held in the [U.S. Southwest](U.S._Southwest "wikilink") with the first
Festival del Rebozo in the country held in [New
Mexico](New_Mexico "wikilink"),[102] exhibitions at the [University of
Texas Brownsville](University_of_Texas_Brownsville "wikilink") at the
Austrey Museum in Los Angeles[103] and
[Fresno](Fresno,_California "wikilink") holds an annual Day of the
Rebozo Festival.[104] There is also a museum dedicated to the garment in
[Guadalajara](Guadalajara "wikilink") called La Casa del Rebozo. In
addition to a collection of rebozos in many sizes, colors and textures,
it offers conferences, classes, workshops and fashion shows to promote
the garment.[105][106]

## Production

![](SantaMariadelRio145.webm "fig:SantaMariadelRio145.webm")
![](Textiles_Taller_2.jpg "fig:Textiles_Taller_2.jpg").\]\]

Mexico is the main producer and exporter of rebozos, but some are also
produced in [Spain](Spain "wikilink") and
[Portugal](Portugal "wikilink").[107][108] Average time to make a
traditionally woven rebozo is thirty to sixty days with anywhere fifteen
to 200 different steps depending on how complicated the design is and
the type of fibre being used.[109][110] For example, rebozos made of
real silk take longer to weave. Those made of rayon have about 3,000
warp threads on average and those made of real silk have about
3,800.[111]

The dying process is done before weaving, with the most common technique
being the ikat method, sometimes called “amarrado” (lit. stingy)[112] In
the most traditional work, thread is dyed with natural colors, with
colors such as black, blue, red, purple and green but synthetic dyes are
now often used.[113][114][115] The patterns of the garment are
determined by a sequence of colors dyed into the thread, with color
changes made similar to tie-dying. Groups of threads are tied together
tightly at intervals so that the dye cannot enter some areas. After
dying, the knots are cut off.[116][117] The weaving begins by cutting
the warp threads to the length of the final product. The number of
threads determines the width.[118] They are woven on both [backstrap
looms](Loom#Back_strap_loom "wikilink") and European style looms.[119]
The groups of warp threads are then placed on the loom in order to work
out the design that the body of the cloth will have.[120] After weaving,
the last rows of the weft are finger weaved to secure them, which is
complicated and meticulous work, often done by women specialized in
this.[121] Isabel Rivera and Julia Sánches of Santa María have won
national and international awards for their work, with the ability to
weave letters into the fringes of rebozos.[122][123] In some areas,
after they are finished, rebozos are “smoked” with rosemary branches or
are stored with apples or quince in order to make them smell good.[124]
![](InocencioWorkshop12.JPG "fig:InocencioWorkshop12.JPG")
![](FeriadeRebozo2014_53.JPG "fig:FeriadeRebozo2014_53.JPG") There are a
number of locations in Mexico which produce traditional rebozos
including, [Zamora](Zamora,_Michoacán "wikilink"),
[Ahuirán](Ahuirán "wikilink"), [Turícuaro](Turícuaro "wikilink"),
[Angahuan](Angahuan "wikilink"), [Santa
Cruz](Santa_Cruz,_Michoacán "wikilink"), [Tocuaro](Tocuaro "wikilink"),
[Zitácuaro](Zitácuaro "wikilink"),
[Cuanajo](Cuanajo,_Michoacán "wikilink"),
[Arocutín](Arocutín,_Michoacán "wikilink") and
[Tangancícuaro](Tangancícuaro "wikilink") in Michoacán,[125][126]
[Moroleón](Moroleón "wikilink") and [Uriangato](Uriangato "wikilink") in
[Guanajuato](Guanajuato "wikilink"),[127] the Altos de Chiapas region,
[Xochistlahuaca](Xochistlahuaca "wikilink") in Guerrero, the [Sierra
Norte de Puebla](Sierra_Norte_de_Puebla "wikilink"), [San Pedro
Cajonos](San_Pedro_Cajonos "wikilink"), [Pinotepa de Don
Luis](Pinotepa_de_Don_Luis "wikilink"), [Yalalag](Yalalag "wikilink"),
and [Santa María Tlahuitoltepec](Santa_María_Tlahuitoltepec "wikilink")
in [Oaxaca](Oaxaca "wikilink")[128] as well as the Cooperativa Textil
Artesanal in the [city of Oaxaca](Oaxaca,_Oaxaca "wikilink")[129] and
[Chiautempan](Chiautempan "wikilink"),
[Tlaxcala](Tlaxcala "wikilink"),[130] However, there are several
important locations whose work are featured in important collections
such as that of the [Rockefeller family](Rockefeller_family "wikilink").
These include Santa María del Río, Tenancingo and La Piedad.[131]
![](InocencioWorkshop29.JPG "fig:InocencioWorkshop29.JPG") [Santa María
del Río](Santa_María_del_Río,_San_Luis_Potosí "wikilink") is a small
rural town in the state of [San Luis
Potosí](San_Luis_Potosí "wikilink"), containing country homes for the
well-to-do in the [city of San Luis
Potosí](San_Luis_Potosí,_San_Luis_Potosí "wikilink"). The entrance arch
of the town states “Santa María del Río, cuna del rebozo” (Santa María
del Río, cradle of the rebozo).[132] Even the local baseball team is
named after rebozo weavers, called the “Reboceros.”[133] It is known for
its production of finely woven rebozos especially in silk and rayon,
with cotton ones made as well.[134] Weaving was introduced to the area
shortly after the conquest and gained fame by the 17th century.[135]
Silk production was introduced originally in Oaxaca by the
[Dominicans](Dominican_Order "wikilink"). Despite prohibitions,
[Junípero Serra](Junípero_Serra "wikilink") introduced their cultivation
into the region in the 18th century, with silk production and weaving
becoming widespread by the late 19th century into the 20th.[136][137]
The variety of silk traditionally used in these rebozos is called
“catiteo.”[138] After the [Mexican
Revolution](Mexican_Revolution "wikilink"), the haciendas producing silk
were broken up and many weavers turned to rayon and very few are still
made with pure silk.[139] Their production is done by families, but only
by the women, with a number winning national awards for their work.[140]
In Santa María the use of various browns is a distinguishing
characteristic of the region. Other common colors are black, blue, red,
purple and green along occasional white threads which appear as flecks
in the final product. There are a number of traditional color
combinations and designs with names such as calabrote, Rosita, rosarito,
culebrilla calado and more.[141][142] Santa Maria hosts a Feria del
Rebozo in August and is home to the Escuela de Rebozo (Rebozo School)
and a cooperative called the Taller Escuela de Rebocería.[143]

The making of cotton rebozos is important in
[Tenancingo](Tenancingo,_State_of_Mexico "wikilink") and an image of the
garment appears in the municipality's seal.[144] Tenancingo's rebozos
come in a wide variety of prices from 400 to 4,000
[pesos](Mexican_peso "wikilink"), depending on the quality of the
cotton, the complexity of the design and the thread count. The craft was
developed in Tenancingo by the 17th century and reached its peak during
the 19th century. The creation of the garment remains important both
culturally and economically, with the work here recognized at the
national and international levels.[145] One of the town's most important
weavers is Evaristo Borboa.[146]

The mountain areas of Michoacán have been noted for an indigo blue
variety of rebozo, known as the Michoacán or Tarasco rebozo. In the
1930s and 1940s, the city of [La Piedad](La_Piedad "wikilink"),
Michoacán became a major producer of rebozos of both natural and
synthetic fibres.[147] In 1946 the Unión de Reboceros de La Piedad was
formed and in 1958, the Sindicato Único de Reboceros de La Piedad.[148]

## See also

-   [Aguayo](Aguayo_(cloth) "wikilink"), a similar piece of cloth used
    in the Andes
-   [Dupatta](Dupatta "wikilink"), a similar piece of cloth used in
    South Asia

{{-}}

## References

## External links

-   Hand-colored photographs by Luis Márquez (photographer) of people
    wearing or using rebozos in the 1930s at the [University of Houston
    Digital Library](http://digital.lib.uh.edu/). [Photo
    1](http://digital.lib.uh.edu/u?/p15195coll13,8)[Photo
    2](http://digital.lib.uh.edu/u?/p15195coll13,21)[Photo
    3](http://digital.lib.uh.edu/u?/p15195coll13,2). [Photo
    4](http://digital.lib.uh.edu/u?/p15195coll13,23)

[Category:16th-century
fashion](Category:16th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Mexican
clothing](Category:Mexican_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Mexican
culture](Category:Mexican_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Scarves](Category:Scarves "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[130]

[131]

[132]

[133]

[134]

[135]

[136]

[137]

[138]

[139]

[140]

[141]

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

[147]

[148]