![](Sigi_Schmid_Crew.jpg "fig:Sigi_Schmid_Crew.jpg") wearing a
soccer-style warm woollen scarf and jacket\]\]
![](Woman_wearing_Colorful_Fashion_Scarf_2014.jpg "fig:Woman_wearing_Colorful_Fashion_Scarf_2014.jpg")

A **scarf**, plural *scarves*, is a piece of fabric worn around the
[neck](neck "wikilink") for warmth, sun protection, cleanliness,
fashion, or religious reasons. They can be made in a variety of
different materials such as wool, linen or cotton. It is a common type
of [neckwear](neckwear "wikilink").

## History

Scarves have been worn since ancient times.[1] The [Statue of
Ashurnasirpal II](Statue_of_Ashurnasirpal_II "wikilink") from the 9th
century BC features the emperor wearing a shawl. In [Ancient
Rome](Ancient_Rome "wikilink"), the garment was used to keep clean
rather than warm. It was called a [focale](focale "wikilink") or
*sudarium* (sudarium from the [Latin](Latin_language "wikilink") for
"sweat cloth"), and was used to wipe the sweat from the neck and face in
hot weather. They were originally worn by men around their neck or tied
to their [belt](Belt_(clothing) "wikilink").

Historians believe that during the reign of the Chinese [Emperor
Cheng](Qin_Shi_Huang "wikilink"), scarves made of cloth were used to
identify officers or the rank of Chinese warriors.

In later times, scarves were also worn by soldiers of all ranks in
Croatia around the 17th century. The only difference in the soldiers'
scarves that designated a difference in rank was that the officers had
silk scarves whilst the other ranks were issued with cotton scarves.
Some of the Croatian soldiers served as mercenaries with the French
forces. The men's scarves were sometimes referred to as
"[cravats](cravat "wikilink")" (from the French *cravate*, meaning
"Croat"), and were the precursor of the [necktie](necktie "wikilink").

The scarf became a real fashion accessory by the early 19th century for
both men and women. By the middle of the 20th century, scarves became
one of the most essential and versatile clothing accessories for both
men and women.

## Uses and types

In cold climates, a thick [knitted](knit "wikilink") scarf, often made
of [wool](wool "wikilink"), is tied around the neck to keep warm. This
is usually accompanied by a heavy [jacket](jacket "wikilink") or
[coat](Coat_(clothing) "wikilink"). Also, the scarf could be used to
wrap around the face and ears for additional cover from the cold.

In drier, dustier warm climates, or in environments where there are many
airborne contaminants, a thin [headscarf](headscarf "wikilink"),
[kerchief](kerchief "wikilink"), or [bandanna](bandanna "wikilink") is
often worn over the eyes and nose and mouth to keep the hair clean. Over
time, this custom has evolved into a fashionable item in many cultures,
particularly among women. The [cravat](cravat "wikilink"), an ancestor
of the [necktie](necktie "wikilink") and [bow tie](bow_tie "wikilink"),
evolved from scarves of this sort in [Croatia](Croatia "wikilink")[2].

In India, woollen scarfs with [Bandhani work](Bandhani_work "wikilink")
use tie and dye technique used commonly in Bhuj and Mandvi of the Kutch
District of Gujarat State.

Scarves that are used to cover the lower part of face are sometimes
called a cowl. Scarves can be colloquially called a *neck-wrap*.

Scarfs can be tied in many ways including the pussy-cat bow, the square
knot, the cowboy bib, the ascot knot, the loop, the necktie, and the
gypsy kerchief.[3] Scarfs can also be tied in various ways on the head.

### In religious or cultural use

Several [Christian denominations](Christian_denomination "wikilink")
include a scarf known as a [Stole](Stole_(vestment) "wikilink") as part
of their liturgical vestments.

### In uniforms

Silk scarves were used by pilots of early aircraft in order to keep oily
smoke from the exhaust out of their mouths while flying. These were worn
by pilots of closed cockpit aircraft to prevent neck chafing, especially
by fighter pilots, who were constantly turning their heads from side to
side watching for enemy aircraft. Today, military flight crews wear
scarves imprinted with unit insignia and emblems not for functional
reasons but instead for esprit-de-corps and heritage.

Students in the [United Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink")
traditionally wear [academic scarves](academic_scarf "wikilink") with
distinctive combinations of striped [colours](school_colours "wikilink")
identifying their individual university or college.

Members of the [Scouting](Scouting "wikilink") movement wear a
scarf-like item called a [neckerchief](neckerchief "wikilink") as part
of their uniform, which is sometimes referred to as a scarf. In some
Socialist countries [Young pioneers](Young_pioneer "wikilink") wore a
neckerchief called a [red scarf](red_scarf "wikilink").

### In sport

![](Portugiesische_Fans_bei_der_Euro_2004.jpg "fig:Portugiesische_Fans_bei_der_Euro_2004.jpg").\]\]
![](Liam_Whelan_tombstone.jpg "fig:Liam_Whelan_tombstone.jpg"),
[Glasnevin Cemetery](Glasnevin_Cemetery "wikilink"), decorated with a
[Manchester United](Manchester_United "wikilink") scarf. Football
scarves often form part of memorials.\]\]

Since at least the early 1900s, when the phenomenon began in Britain,
coloured scarves have been traditional supporter wear for fans of
[association football](Football_(soccer) "wikilink") teams across the
world, even those in warmer climates. These scarves come in a wide
variety of sizes and are made in a club's particular colours and may
contain the club crest, pictures of renowned players, and various
slogans relating to the history of the club and its rivalry with others.
At some clubs supporters will sometimes perform a 'scarf wall' in which
all supporters in a section of the stadium will stretch out their
scarves above their heads with both hands, creating an impressive 'wall'
of colour.

This is usually accompanied by the singing of a club anthem such as
"[You'll Never Walk Alone](You'll_Never_Walk_Alone_(song) "wikilink")"
at [Liverpool F.C.](Liverpool_F.C. "wikilink")[4] or "Grazie Roma" at
[A.S. Roma](A.S._Roma "wikilink"). This was initially solely a British
phenomenon, but has since spread to the rest of
[Europe](Europe "wikilink"), [North](North_America "wikilink") and
[South America](South_America "wikilink"). Some clubs supporters will
perform a scarf 'twirl' or 'twirly' in which a group of supporters hold
the scarves above their heads with one hand, and twirl the scarf,
creating a 'blizzard' of colour. This is usually accompanied by a club
anthem such as "[Hey Jude](Hey_Jude "wikilink")" at [Heart of Midlothian
F.C.](Heart_of_Midlothian_F.C. "wikilink")

Scarf wearing is also a noted feature of support for [Australian rules
football](Australian_rules_football "wikilink") clubs in the [Australian
Football League](Australian_Football_League "wikilink"). The scarves are
in the form of alternating bars of colour, usually with the team name or
mascot written on each second bar.

## Gallery

## Manufacturing of scarves

The craft of knitting [garments](garment "wikilink") such as scarves is
an important trade in some countries. Hand-knitted scarves are still
common as gifts as well.

Printed scarves are additionally offered internationally through high
fashion design houses. Among the latter are
[Burberry](Burberry "wikilink"), [Missoni](Missoni "wikilink"),
[Alexander McQueen](Alexander_McQueen "wikilink"), [Cole
Haan](Cole_Haan "wikilink"), [Chanel](Chanel "wikilink"),
[Etro](Etro "wikilink"), [Lanvin](Lanvin_(clothing) "wikilink"),
[Hermès](Hermès "wikilink"), [Nicole Miller](Nicole_Miller "wikilink"),
[Ferragamo](Ferragamo "wikilink"), [Emilio
Pucci](Emilio_Pucci "wikilink"), [Dior](Dior "wikilink"),
[Fendi](Fendi "wikilink"), [Louis Vuitton](Louis_Vuitton "wikilink") and
[Prada](Prada "wikilink").

There are three basic scarf shapes: square, triangular and
rectangular.[5]

The main manufacturer of fashion scarves used today is China; India,
Hong Kong and Indonesia close behind. The most common materials used to
make fashion scarves are silk, fleece, cotton, modal and
[pashmina](pashmina "wikilink") or other [cashmere
wool](cashmere_wool "wikilink").

## See also

-   [Headscarf](Headscarf "wikilink")
-   [Shawl](Shawl "wikilink")

## References

[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Scarves](Category:Scarves "wikilink") [Category:Winter
clothes](Category:Winter_clothes "wikilink")

[1]

[2] "Necktie." *World of Invention*, Gale, 2006. *Biography In Context*,
http://link.galegroup.com/apps/doc/CV1647500543/BIC?u=lom_waynesu&sid=BIC&xid=a9ae2de6.
Accessed 1 Feb. 2019.

[3] Perry, Patricia, (1971). "Everything About Sewing Ponchos Capes
Scarves & Stoles", New York: Butterick Fashion Marketing Company.
70-169062

[4]

[5]