![](Touaregs_at_the_Festival_au_Desert_near_Timbuktu,_Mali_2012.jpg "fig:Touaregs_at_the_Festival_au_Desert_near_Timbuktu,_Mali_2012.jpg")
men\]\] ![](Cheche.JPG "fig:Cheche.JPG") The **tagelmust** (also known
as **cheich**, **cheche** and *[litham](litham "wikilink")*) is an
[indigo](indigo_dye "wikilink")-dyed [cotton](cotton "wikilink")
garment, with the appearance of both a [veil](veil "wikilink") and a
[turban](turban "wikilink"). The cloth may exceed ten meters in length.
It is mostly worn by [Tuareg](Tuareg_people "wikilink")
[Berber](Berbers "wikilink") men, the [Hausa](Hausa_people "wikilink")
of the far northern Sahel region and the
[Songhai](Songhai_people "wikilink"). In recent times, other colors have
come into use, with the indigo veils saved for use on special occasions.
It usually has many layers that cover the head, and it drapes down to
loosely cover the neck. It is also worn by some French people as a
scarf.

The tagelmust covers the head. It prevents the inhalation of [wind-borne
sand](wind-borne_sand "wikilink") by its wearers in the
[Sahara](Sahara "wikilink") region.[1] The indigo is also believed by
many of the wearers to be healthy and beautiful, with a buildup of
indigo in the skin of the wearer being generally considered to protect
the skin, and denote affluence.[2] Because of the scarcity of water, the
tagelmust is often dyed by pounding in dried indigo instead of soaking
it. The dye often permanently [leaches](wikt:leaching "wikilink") into
the skin of the wearer, and because of this, the Tuareg are often
referred to as the "blue men of the desert".[3]

Among the Tuareg, men who wear the tagelmust are called *Kel Tagelmust*,
or "People of the Veil".[4] The tagelmust is worn only by adult males,
and only taken off in the presence of close family. Tuareg men often
find shame in showing their mouth or nose to strangers or people of a
higher standing than themselves, and have been known to hide their
features using their hands if a tagelmust is unavailable. The tagelmust
has other cultural significance, as the manner in which it is wrapped
and folded is often used to show clan and regional origin, and the
darkness to which it is dyed showing the wealth of the wearer.

## See also

-   [Alasho](Alasho "wikilink"), a similar turban veil worn by Hausa men
-   [Litham](Litham "wikilink"), the Arabic term for the garment

## References

-

[Category:African clothing](Category:African_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Headgear](Category:Headgear "wikilink") [Category:Berber
culture](Category:Berber_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Scarves](Category:Scarves "wikilink") [Category:Shawls and
wraps](Category:Shawls_and_wraps "wikilink")
[Category:Tuareg](Category:Tuareg "wikilink")
[Category:Veils](Category:Veils "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]