<img src="Lewis_memin-tippet.jpg" title="fig:Lewis_memin-tippet.jpg" width="190" alt="Lewis_memin-tippet.jpg" />
wearing a tippet presented to him by [Sacagawea](Sacagawea "wikilink")'s
brother, [Cameahwait](Cameahwait "wikilink").\]\] A **tippet** is a
[scarf](scarf "wikilink")-like narrow piece of clothing, worn over the
shoulders. It may also be likened to a
[stole](Stole_(vestment) "wikilink") in the secular rather than
ecclesiastic sense of this word. Tippets evolved in the [fourteenth
century](1300–1400_in_fashion "wikilink") from long sleeves and
typically had one end hanging down to the knees. In later fashion, a
tippet is often any scarf-like wrap, usually made of
[fur](fur "wikilink"), such as the [sixteenth
century](1550–1600_in_fashion "wikilink")
[zibellino](zibellino "wikilink")[1] or the fur-lined capelets worn in
the [mid-18th century](1700–1750_in_fashion "wikilink").

## Ecclesiastical use

![](Choirhabit.jpg "fig:Choirhabit.jpg") [priest](priest "wikilink")
wearing a black tippet.\]\]

### Anglican

The ceremonial scarf worn by [Anglican](Anglicanism "wikilink") priests,
deacons, and lay readers is formally called a tippet, although it is
often known colloquially as a "preaching scarf". It is worn with [choir
dress](choir_dress "wikilink") and hangs straight down at the front.
[Ordained](Ordination "wikilink") [clergy](clergy "wikilink") (bishops,
priests and deacons) wear a black tippet, while
[readers](reader_(liturgy) "wikilink") (known in some dioceses as
licensed lay ministers) wear a blue one. Commissioned evangelists of the
[Church Army](Church_Army "wikilink") are presented with a cherry red
'collar' type tippet, as a sign of authority to preach, but some replace
this with a scarf form of the tippet, but retaining the distinctive red
colour. A red tippet is also worn in some Anglican dioceses by
commissioned lay workers.

Tippets are often worn for the Daily Offices of [Morning
Prayer](Morning_Prayer_(Anglican) "wikilink") and [Evening
Prayer](Evening_Prayer_(Anglican) "wikilink"), as required in
[Canon](Canon_law "wikilink") B8 of the Church of England (in the Canon,
the word "scarf" is used in reference to the tippet).[2] Stricter [low
church](low_church "wikilink") clergy may wear the tippet and [choir
dress](choir_dress "wikilink") during any church service, whether
Communion is celebrated or not. This follows a practice that was
enforced from the Reformation until the late 19th century. By contrast,
[Anglican Catholics](Anglo-Catholicism "wikilink") tend not to wear the
tippet, often preferring to wear the choir habit of Roman Catholic
clergy instead.

Clergy who are entitled to wear medals, orders, or awards may fix them
to the upper left side of the tippet on suitable occasions (such as
[Remembrance Sunday](Remembrance_Sunday "wikilink")). Sometimes the
right end of the tippet is embroidered with the coat of arms of the
ecclesiastical institution of which the cleric is a member, but some
deplore this usage. It is common for English cathedral Canons to have
the coat of arms of their cathedral embroidered on one or both sides of
the tippet.

The tippet is a different item from the
[stole](stole_(vestment) "wikilink"), which although often worn like a
scarf is a Eucharistic [vestment](vestment "wikilink"), usually made of
richer material, and varying according to the [liturgical
colour](Liturgical_color#Anglicanism "wikilink") of the day.

### Other denominations

In the British Army, all serving chaplains are issued with a tippet to
be worn directly over [battledress](battledress "wikilink") when
ministering in conflict zones. Anglican chaplains wear the standard
black tippet, whilst Roman Catholic chaplains are distinguished by a
violet coloured tippet.

Some Lutherans also use the tippet. Members of the Lutheran [Society of
the Holy Trinity](Society_of_the_Holy_Trinity "wikilink") wear a black
tippet embroidered with the Society's seal when presiding at the daily
office.

The black preaching scarf (or rarely blue, grey, or green) is also worn
by some [Scottish Presbyterian](Church_of_Scotland "wikilink") ministers
and other [non-conformist](non-conformist "wikilink") clergy.

## British military nurses

A different and non-religious sort of tippet, a shoulder-length cape,
has been part of the uniform of British military nurses or of nursing
uniforms in Commonwealth countries. These are often decorated with
piping and may have badges or insignia indicating the wearer's rank.
![](StateLibQld_1_193271_Nurse_Ella_McLean.jpg "fig:StateLibQld_1_193271_Nurse_Ella_McLean.jpg")

## Evolution of the tippet

Image:Romance of alexander.jpg\|Fourteenth century fur-lined tippet or
hanging sleeve Image:Clouet Claude de Chateaubrun.jpg\|Sixteenth century
zibellino or fur tippet Image:Jean-Marc Nattier - Comtesse Tessin -
WGA16463.jpg\|Eighteenth century fur-lined tippet or capelet

## Notes

## References

-   Arnold, Janet: *Queen Elizabeth's Wardrobe Unlock'd*, W S Maney and
    Son Ltd, Leeds 1988.
-   Netherton, Robin, "The Tippet: Accessory after Fact?", in Robin
    Netherton and [Gale R. Owen-Crocker](Gale_Owen-Crocker "wikilink"),
    editors, *Medieval Clothing and Textiles*, Volume 1, Woodbridge,
    Suffolk, UK, and Rochester, NY, the Boydell Press, 2005,
-   Payne, Blanche: *History of Costume from the Ancient Egyptians to
    the Twentieth Century*, Harper & Row, 1965. No ISBN for this
    edition; ASIN B0006BMNFS
-   [Dickinson, Emily](Emily_Dickinson "wikilink"), "My Tippet - only
    Tulle -", in *Because I could not stop for Death*, Poems, Robert
    Brothers of Boston, 1890

[Category:Scarves](Category:Scarves "wikilink") [Category:Shawls and
wraps](Category:Shawls_and_wraps "wikilink") [Category:Anglican
vestments](Category:Anglican_vestments "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing](Category:History_of_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Fur](Category:Fur "wikilink")

[1] Arnold, Janet: *Queen Elizabeth's Wardrobe Unlock'd*, W S Maney and
Son Ltd, Leeds 1988.

[2]