---
title: Bangle
permalink: /Bangle/
---

**Bangles** are traditionally rigid bracelets, originating from the
Indian subcontinent, which are usually made of metal, wood, glass or
plastic. They are traditional ornaments worn mostly by women from the
Indian subcontinent. It is common to see a new bride wearing glass
bangles at her wedding, the traditional view is that the honeymoon will
end when the last bangle breaks. Bangles also have a very traditional
value in Hinduism as it is considered inauspicious for a married woman
to be bare armed. Bangles may also be worn by young girls and bangles
made of gold or silver are preferred for toddlers.

## Design

Bangles are circular in shape, and, unlike bracelets, are not flexible.
The word is derived from Hindi bungri (glass). They are made of numerous
precious as well as non-precious materials such as gold, silver,
platinum, glass, wood, ferrous metals, plastic, etc. Bangles made from
sea shell, which are white colour, are worn by married Bengali and Oriya
Hindu women. A special type of bangle is worn by women and girls,
especially in the Bengal area, commonly known as a "Bengali bangle",
which is used as a substitute for a costly gold bangle, and is produced
by fixing a thin gold strip (weighing between 1â€“3 g) is
thermo-mechanically fused onto a bronze bangle, followed by manual
crafting on that fused gold strip.

Bangles are part of traditional Indian jewellery. They are sometimes
worn in pairs by women, one or more on each arm. It is also common for
women to wear a single bangle or several bangles on just one wrist. Most
Indian women prefer wearing either gold or glass bangles or a
combination of both. Inexpensive bangles made from plastic are slowly
replacing those made by glass, but the ones made of glass are still
preferred at traditional occasions such as marriages and on festivals.
Bangles are the signs for traditional women and girls. Bangles play a
very important role in various India dance forms. Some of dance forms
include bangles striking to each other a tone of the music.

The designs range from simple to intricate handmade designs, often
studded with precious and semi-precious stones such as diamonds, gems
and pearls. Sets of expensive bangles made of gold and silver make a
jingling sound. The imitation jewellery tends to make a tinny sound when
jingled. [Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")