---
title: Bracelet
permalink: /Bracelet/
---

A **bracelet** is an article of jewellery that is worn around the wrist.
Bracelets may serve different uses, such as being worn as an ornament.
When worn as ornaments, bracelets may have a supportive function to hold
other items of decoration, such as charms. Medical and identity
information are marked on some bracelets, such as allergy bracelets,
hospital patient-identification tags, and bracelet tags for newborn
babies. Bracelets may be worn to signify a certain phenomenon, such as
breast cancer awareness, or for religious/cultural purposes.

If a bracelet is a single, inflexible loop, it is often called a
*bangle*. When it is worn around the ankle it is called an *ankle
bracelet* or *anklet*. A *boot bracelet* is used to decorate boots.
Colloquially, handcuffs are sometimes called *bracelets*. Bracelets can
be manufactured from metal, leather, cloth, plastic, bead or other
materials, and jewelry bracelets sometimes contain jewels, rocks, wood,
shells, crystals, metal, or plastic hoops, pearls and many more
materials.

## Origin

Ancient Egyptian hinged cuff bracelet, c. 1479 –1425 BCE Penannular
bracelet, Oxus Treasure, Achaemenid period, c. 500 BCE

Although the term *armlet* may be technically similar, it is taken to
mean an item that sits on the upper shoulder: an arm ring. The origin of
the term 'bracelet' is from the Greek *brachile* meaning 'of the arm',
via the Old French *bracel*. A bracelet is also a small brace or bracer
(an arm-guard used by archers).

## Cultural and religious significance

The history of Egyptian bracelets is as old as 5000 BCE. Starting with
materials like bones, stones and woods to serve religious and spiritual
interests. From the National Geographic Society, the Scarab Bracelet is
one of the most recognized symbols of ancient Egypt. The scarab
represented rebirth and regeneration. Carved scarabs were worn as
jewelry and wrapped into the linen bandages of mummies. Myth told of the
scarab god, Khepri, pushing the sun across the sky.

In 2008, Russian archaeologists from the Institute of Archaeology and
Ethnology of Novosibirsk, working at the site of Denisova Cave in the
Altai Mountains of Siberia, uncovered a small bone fragment from the
fifth finger of a juvenile hominin, dubbed the "X woman" (referring to
the maternal descent of mitochondrial DNA,) or the Denisova hominin.
Artifacts, including a bracelet, excavated in the cave at the same level
were carbon dated to around 40,000 BP.

In Bulgaria there is a tradition called martenitsa, which sometimes
involves tying a red and white string around the wrist to please Baba
Marta in order for spring to come sooner.

In Greece a similar tradition, weaving a bracelet from red and white
string on the first day of March and wearing it till the end of summer,
is called "Martis" and is considered to help protect the wearer's skin
from the strong Greek sun.

In some parts of India, the number and type of bangles worn by a woman
denotes her marital status

In Sikhism an iron bracelet is one of the mandatory articles known as
the Five Ks.

In Latin America, Azabache Bracelets are worn to protect against the Mal
de ojo, or evil eye. The evil eye is believed to result of excessive
admiration or envious looks by others. Having newborn babies wear an
azabache (a gold bracelet or necklace with a black or red coral charm in
the form of a fist), is believed to protect them from the evil eye.

Taken in the plural, *bracelets* is often used as slang for handcuffs.

## Types

### Alternative health

Alternative health bracelets, such as ionized bracelets, karma
bracelets, magnetic bracelets, Power Balance hologram bracelets, etc.,
are not distinguished by their design but rather the beneficial function
claimed for them by their manufacturers and distributors. Karma
bracelets are made from wood beads and may contain various charms, and
are associated with bringing good luck and good karma to those who
choose to wear it. No claims of effectiveness made by manufacturers have
ever been substantiated by independent sources.

### Bangles

Main article: Bangle metal bangles Rigid bracelets, usually from metal,
wood, or plastic, are referred to as *bangles* or *bangle bracelets*.
They can be smooth, textured or set with stones. In India, glass bangles
are common. Made from ordinary glass that is about 3 to 6 millimetres
(<sup>1</sup>⁄<sub>8</sub> to <sup>1</sup>⁄<sub>4</sub> in) in width,
they are worn in groups so that arm movement causes them to make a
gracious sound rather like the clinking of wind chimes. In India, it is
also common that young children will wear thin gold bangles on their
hands and ankles.

### Beaded

Amber beaded bracelet Usually made from loose beads with a center hole
and connected by a piece of string or elastic band through the holes.

### Charm

A charm bracelet carries personal charms: decorative pendants or
trinkets which are signifiers of important things, interests/hobbies,
and memories in the wearer's life.The decorative charms usually carry
personal or sentimental attachment by the owner and these are the
designer bracelets which also increase its demand. Are popular with all
age ranges, but especially for children.

In recent history, Italian charm bracelets have become trendy. While
traditional charms dangle, Italian charms feature individual pieces
soldered flat onto the surface of the link. Chain mail bracelet, in
Byzantine weave, with silver-plated copper rings and green aluminium
rings

### Link

Link bracelet Bracelets made from connecting or linking various or
similar components or jewelry findings. Link bracelets can be made of a
variety of materials including metals and gemstones.

### Penannular

Penannular, meaning an incomplete circle, has been a very common form
for bracelets, especially ones made in a single piece of a slightly
flexible material such as metal or plastic. It is particularly popular
in gold.

### Slap

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, "slap bracelets" – flat, felt-covered
metal strips that curved around one's wrist when gently hit against
it—were a popular fad. Often adorned with neon colors and vivid
graphics, these bracelets could be found at inexpensive retailers. A
rumor emerged that "slap bracelets" caused bleeding and puncture wounds
and thus fell out of style.

### Sports

Main article: Gel bracelet Silicone and stainless steel emergency ID
sports bracelet (2010). The use of colored silicone rubber as a material
for producing sports bracelets was popularized by Nike and Lance
Armstrong through the Yellow Livestrong wristband starting in May 2003.
Their success has led to the silicone bracelet becoming a high cost tool
for various awareness, information, and charity campaigns. This can be
likened to the use of awareness ribbons for similar purposes. These
bracelets are also known as "baller id bands", "baller bands" or
"wristbands". They can also be referred to as rubber wristbands,
silicone wristbands or gel wristbands. For sport climbing, bracelets are
designed with climbing cords (dynamic rope) to serve as a mountain
climbing gear.

### Tennis

Vintage Trifari in-line jewelry bracelet, a.k.a. "tennis bracelet". A
possible origin of the name "tennis bracelet" comes from a story of the
1987 U.S. Open when Chris Evert dropped her bracelet on the court and
the match was stopped to search for it. Details have been disputed,
however, since articles predating the 1987 U.S. Open used the term, and
Evert herself remembers losing her bracelet in 1978, not 1987.
[Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")
[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")