---
title: Charm bracelet
permalink: /Charm_bracelet/
---

A **charm bracelet** is a type of bracelet which carries personal
jewelled ornaments or "charms", such as decorative pendants or trinkets.
The decorative *charms* usually carry personal or sentimental attachment
by the owner.

## History

The wearing of charms may have begun as a form of amulet or talisman to
ward off evil spirits or bad luck.

During the pre-historic period, jewellery charms would be made from
shells, animal-bones and clay. Later charms were made out of gems,
rocks, and wood.

For instance, there is evidence from Africa that shells were used for
adornments around 75,000 years ago. In Germany intricately carved
mammoth tusk charms have been found from around 30,000 years ago. In
ancient Egypt charms were used for identification and as symbols of
faith and luck. Charms also served to identify an individual to the gods
in the afterlife.

During the Roman Empire, Christians would use tiny fish charms hidden in
their clothing to identify themselves to other Christians. Jewish
scholars of the same period would write tiny passages of Jewish law and
put them in amulets round their necks to keep the law close to their
heart at all times. Medieval knights wore charms for protection in
battle. Charms also were worn in the Dark Ages to denote family origin
and religious and political convictions.

Charm bracelets have been the subject of several waves of trends. The
first charm bracelets were worn by Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, and
Hittites and began appearing from 600 – 400 BC.

For example, Queen Victoria wore charm bracelets that started a fashion
among the European noble classes. She was instrumental to the popularity
of charm bracelets, as she “loved to wear and give charm bracelets. When
her beloved Prince Albert died, she even made “mourning” charms popular;
lockets of hair from the deceased, miniature portraits of the deceased,
charm bracelets carved in jet.” An antique silver charm bracelet. In
1889, Tiffany and Co. introduced their first charm bracelet — a link
bracelet with a single heart dangling from it, a bracelet which is an
iconic symbol for Tiffany today.

Despite the Great Depression, during the 1920s and 1930s platinum and
diamonds were introduced to charm bracelet manufacturing.

Soldiers returning home after World War II brought home trinkets made by
craftsmen local to the area where they were fighting to give to loved
ones. American teenagers in the 1950s and early 1960s collected charms
to record the events in their lives. Screen icons like Elizabeth Taylor
and Joan Crawford helped to fuel the interest and popularity of charm
bracelets.

Although interest and production waned through the latter part of the
20th century, there was a resurgence of popularity after 2000 and
collectors eagerly sought out vintage charms. Inspired by the movie
*Pirates of the Caribbean*, bracelets with little charms of swords,
crosses and skulls were introduced as a fashion trend during winter
2006. [Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")
[Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")