---
title: Earring
permalink: /Earring/
---

An **earring** is a piece of jewelry attached to the ear via a piercing
in the earlobe or another external part of the ear (except in the case
of clip earrings, which clip onto the lobe). Earrings are worn by both
sexes, although more common among women, and have been used by different
civilizations in different times.

Locations for piercings other than the earlobe include the rook, tragus,
and across the helix (see image at right). The simple term "ear
piercing" usually refers to an earlobe piercing, whereas piercings in
the upper part of the external ear are often referred to as "cartilage
piercings". Cartilage piercings are more complex to perform than earlobe
piercings and take longer to heal.

Earring components may be made of any number of materials, including
metal, plastic, glass, precious stone, beads, wood, bone, and other
materials. Designs range from small loops and studs to large plates and
dangling items. The size is ultimately limited by the physical capacity
of the earlobe to hold the earring without tearing. However, heavy
earrings worn over extended periods of time may lead to stretching of
the earlobe and the piercing.

## Types

### Modern standard pierced earrings



#### Statement earrings

Statement earrings can be defined as "earrings which invite attention
from others by demonstrating bold, original, and unique designs with
innovative construction and material combinations". They include one or
more of the following design features: Pair of starter stud earrings.

-   Dangles
-   Tassels
-   Sparkles
-   Bold or striking colours

#### Stud/minimal earrings

The main characteristic of stud earrings is the appearance of floating
on the ear or earlobe without a visible (from the front) point of
connection. Studs are invariably constructed on the end of a post, which
penetrates straight through the ear or earlobe. The post is held in
place by a removable friction back or *clutch*. A stud earring features
a gemstone or other ornament mounted on a narrow post that passes
through a piercing in the ear or earlobe, and is held in place by a
fixture on the other side. Studs commonly come in the form of solitaire
diamonds. Some stud earrings are constructed so that the post is
threaded, allowing a *screw back* to hold the earring in place securely,
which is useful in preventing the loss of expensive earrings containing
precious stones, or made of precious metals.

#### Hoop earrings

Hoop earrings are circular or semi-circular in design and look very
similar to a ring. Hoop earrings generally come in the form of a hoop of
metal that can be opened to pass through the ear piercing. They are
often constructed of metal tubing, with a thin wire attachment
penetrating the ear. The hollow tubing is permanently attached to the
wire at the front of the ear, and slips into the tube at the back. The
entire device is held together by tension between the wire and the tube.
Other hoop designs do not complete the circle, but penetrate through the
ear in a post, using the same attachment techniques that apply to stud
earrings. A variation is the *continuous hoop earring*. In this design,
the earring is constructed of a continuous piece of solid metal, which
penetrates through the ear and can be rotated almost 360Â°. One of the
ends is permanently attached to a small piece of metallic tubing or a
hollow metallic bead. The other end is inserted into the tubing or bead,
and is held in place by tension. One special type of hoop earring is the
*sleeper earring*, a circular wire normally made of gold, with a
diameter of approximately one centimeter. *Hinged* sleepers, which were
common in Britain in the 1960s and 1970s, comprise two semi-circular
gold wires connected via a tiny hinge at one end, and fastened via a
small clasp at the other, to form a continuous hoop whose fastening
mechanism is effectively invisible to the naked eye. Because their small
size makes them unobtrusive and comfortable, and because they are
normally otherwise unadorned, *sleepers* are so-called because they were
intended to be worn at night to keep a pierced ear from closing, and
were often the choice for the first set of earrings immediately
following the ear piercing in the decades before ear-piercing guns using
studs became commonplace, but are often a fashion choice in themselves
because of their attractive simplicity and because they subtly call
attention to the fact that the ear is pierced.

A drop earring attaches to the earlobe and features a gemstone or
ornament that dangles down from a chain, hoop, or similar object. The
length of these ornaments vary from the very short to the extravagantly
long. Such earrings are occasionally known as droplet earrings, dangle
earrings, or pendant earrings. They also include chandelier earrings,
which branch out into elaborate, multi-level pendants.

#### Dangle earrings

Traditional earrings Dangle earrings are designed to flow from the
bottoms of the earlobes, and are available in various lengths from a
centimeter or two, all the way to brushing the shoulders. They are
generally attached to the ear by the use of thin wires, which go through
the earlobe and connect to themselves in a small hook at the back. A
variation is the *French hook* design, which merely hangs from the
earlobe without closure, although small plastic retainers are sometimes
used on ends of French hooks. Rarely, dangle earrings use the post
attachment design.

#### Barbell earrings

Barbell earrings get their name from their resemblance to a barbell,
generally coming in the form of a metal bar with an orb on either end.
One of these orbs is affixed in place, while the other can be detached
to allow the barbell to be inserted into a piercing. Several variations
on this basic design exist, including barbells with curves or angles in
the bar of the earring.

#### Huggy earrings

Commonly, stones are channel set in huggy earrings.

#### Ear thread

Or earthreader, ear string, threader, a chain that is thin enough to
slip into the ear hole, and come back out, dangles. Sometimes, people
add beads or other materials onto the chain, so the chain dangles with
beads below the ear. [Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")
[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")