---
title: Gel bracelet
permalink: /Gel_bracelet/
---

**Gel bracelets**, or **jelly bracelets** are an inexpensive type of
wristband often made from Silicone. They come in a variety of colors,
and several can be worn on each arm. They have been popular in waves
throughout the Western world and elsewhere since the 1980s. One style of
these wristbands, known as "**awareness bracelets**", carry debossed
messages demonstrating the wearer's support of a cause or charitable
organization.

## Charity awareness wristbands

Livestrong wristbands popularized gel bracelets for charity purposes.
This humorous example is used to raise awareness about the 2010 *Tonight
Show* conflict.

The silicone wristband first became popular in 2004 with the Livestrong
yellow band which was set up by American cyclist Lance Armstrong to
raise awareness of cancer. A larger, 1" wide variety became more popular
in 2007, with bands selling the inexpensive items to young concert fans.
Both the wider and thinner bands are cheap to customize and as a result
have become a popular fundraising tool in America and beyond.

The price of these wristbands varies depending on the particular
campaign, but are often $1 or £1 and usually the majority of the money
goes towards the charity involved. They are seen by young people as
trendier than traditional charity pins which may explain their increase
in popularity.

## Urban legend of sex bracelets

See also: Handkerchief code

During a resurgence in popularity in 2003, gel bracelets became the
subject of a widespread urban legend linking them to a supposed sex game
explaining their popularity among young teenagers: they were
subsequently dubbed "**sex bracelets**". According to rumors, people who
wore the jewelry implied they were willing to engage in various acts
with whoever pulled them from their wrists; the acts ranged from hugging
and kissing to sexual intercourse, and were determined by the bracelet's
color.

In October 2003, the rumors were prominent enough in Alachua Elementary
School in Gainesville, Florida that the principal banned the bracelets
to avert disruption and inappropriate comments about them. They were
subsequently banned in other schools around Florida and elsewhere. The
effectors of these early bans did not insinuate that the rumors were
true; however, some later media reports suggested that they may have
been, generating something of a moral panic. The supposed meanings of
the colours of the bands were reported in the British press in 2005.

A very similar set of stories surfaced (or re-surfaced) in the British
media in 2009, in which the bracelets were allegedly nicknamed *shag
bands*. Similar stories circulated widely in Brazil during the 2009–2010
summer, where the bracelets were referred to as *pulseiras do sexo*. In
March 2010, a 13-year-old girl in Brazil was raped by three teenage boys
after one of them snatched the bracelet she was wearing. The police
stated that the crime was motivated by the use of sex bracelets.

Different versions associate different colors with sex acts (similar to
the handkerchief code). For example, purple might be associated with
kissing, red with lapdancing, and black with intercourse. Some versions
said the involved action occurs at parties held for the purpose, making
them similar to contemporary rumors of "rainbow parties", a gathering at
which groups of girls wearing varying shades of lipstick supposedly take
turns fellating their classmates, leaving an array of colors on their
penises. Other tales of teenage sex parties have circulated at various
times. Folklorist Barbara Mikkelson of snopes.com associates the "sex
bracelet" stories with similar ones of the past. In the 1970s, pulltabs
from aluminum cans and labels from beer bottles were supposedly
considered "sex coupons" and obligated any girl presented with one to
sleep with the bearer; by the 1990s the rumors shifted to include an
assortment of plastic items, including some worn as bracelets. According
to Mikkelson, there is likely little truth behind the stories, and the
vast majority of teenagers who contact her site express shock and
disappointment that so many have believed them.

At least one particular type of gel bracelet called the MY Single Band
was specifically designed to advertise the wearer's relationship status.
In a press release, creators, Rina Mardahl and Rob Young, compared their
concept to that of wedding rings that show the married status of a
wearer, Young saying he "saw hundreds of people each day that could
potentially be a suitable partner, yet there was no way of knowing their
relationship status." The response to this bracelet was largely
critical, with Natasha Burton of *Cosmopolitan* saying she doubted men
would look for such a bracelet, given that she was still approached even
while wearing her engagement ring. The staff of *Glamour* were
reportedly uncomfortable with the concept, and Eliana Dockterman of
*Time* magazine compared the concept to wearing one's OkCupid profile on
one's t-shirt. [Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")
[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")