---
title: Lapel pins
permalink: /Lapel_pins/
---

A **lapel pin**, also known as an **enamel pin**, is a small pin worn on
clothing, often on the lapel of a jacket, attached to a bag, or
displayed on a piece of fabric. Lapel pins can be ornamental or can
indicate wearer's affiliation with an organization or cause. Before the
popularity of wearing lapel pins, boutonni√®res were worn.



## Popular usage

A Wikipedia lapel pin Lapel pins are frequently used as symbols of
achievement and belonging in different organizations. Lapel pins from
the organization are often collected by members and non-members alike.

Businesses also use lapel pins to designate achievement and membership.
Lapel pins are a common element of employee recognition programs, and
they are presented to individuals as a symbol of an accomplishment. Like
fraternity and sorority pins, these lapel pins instill a sense of
belonging to an elite group of performers at the organization.
Businesses also award lapel pins to employees more frequently to boost
employee morale, productivity, and employee engagement.

The Soviet Union had great production of these. Besides pins showing
political figures and as souvenirs for tourist spots, there were pins
for various sports, cultural, and political gatherings and for technical
achievements of the Soviet Union. The pins had counter cultural meanings
as well; for example, the pin featuring the robot spacecraft Kosmos 186
(which approached and docked with Kosmos 188) had a sexual connotation.

In recent years, pin collecting and trading has also become a popular
hobby. Demand for pin designs based on popular cartoon characters and
themes such as Disney, Betty Boop, and Hard Rock Cafe has surged and led
to the creation of pin trading events and other social activities.
Disney pin trading is a prime example of this.

## Cultural significance

Chairman Mao badges from China In the USSR and the People's Republic of
China, the prominent lapel pins with portraits of Lenin and Mao Zedong,
respectively, were worn by youth as well as by Communist party members
or people who felt like showing their official political credo. In
Czechoslovakia, the Mao badges/pins were worn in the late 1960s and
early 1970s by non-conformist youth as a prank and a way to provoke the
"normalisationist" reactionaries of the purged post-1968 Communist Party
of Czechoslovakia.

In the 1970s, initiates of Guru Maharaj Ji extensively used buttons,
sometimes quite large, with images of the guru's face on them.

Senior politicians in the UK's government, wore official Games pins for
the London 2012 Summer Olympics.

## Design

Pin design starts off very similar to animation. Everything is hand
drawn with a blue line. It is done either digitally or on paper with a
light-box to plan out all the elements and artwork that make up the
design. Once the design is approved, it is inked, colored, and placed on
a mechanical sheet, which is like a blueprint for the pin, with
appropriate measurements and call-outs for manufacturing the parts.
[Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")
[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")