---
title: Necklace
permalink: /Necklace/
---

A **necklace** is an article of jewelry that is worn around the neck.
Necklaces may have been one of the earliest types of adornment worn by
humans. They often serve ceremonial, religious, magical, or funerary
purposes and are also used as symbols of wealth and status, given that
they are commonly made of precious metals and stones.

The main component of a necklace is the band, chain, or cord that wraps
around the neck. These are most often rendered in precious metals such
as gold, silver, and platinum. Necklaces often have additional
attachments suspended or inset into the necklace itself. These
attachments typically include pendants, lockets, amulets, crosses, and
precious and semi-precious materials such as diamond, pearls, rubies,
emeralds, garnets, and sapphires. They are made with many different type
of materials and are used for many things

## Types

Necklaces are typically classified by length . Necklace length diagram

Choker
35 centimetres (14 in) to 41 centimetres (16 in) long and sits high on
the neck.

Princess necklace
A princess necklace is 45 centimetres (18 in) to 50 centimetres (20 in)
long, longer than a choker, but shorter than a matinee.

Matinee necklace
A matinee length necklace is 56 centimetres (22 in) to 58 centimetres
(23 in) long â€” typically a single strand that rests at the top of the
cleavage.

Opera necklace
An opera necklace is 75 centimetres (30 in) to 90 centimetres (35 in)
long and sits at the breastbone.

Rope necklace
A rope necklace is any necklace longer than opera length.

Lariat necklace
A lariat is a very, very long variation on the rope, without a clasp,
often worn draped multiple times around the neck; the ends can be
crossed over, looped, or knotted in various ways. This type of necklace
sometimes incorporates a loop at one or both ends to allow it to be worn
in the style of a lasso, or it may be worn doubled over with the ends
passed through the loop formed in the middle.

[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")
[Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")