---
title: Pendant
permalink: /Pendant/
---

The word **pendant** derives from the Latin word *pendere* and Old
French word *pendr*, both of which translate to "to hang down". It comes
in the form of a loose-hanging piece of jewellery, generally attached by
a small loop to a necklace, which may be known as a "pendant necklace".
A pendant earring is an earring with a piece hanging down. In modern
French, *pendant* is the gerund form of *pendre* (" to hang") and also
means "during". The extent to which the design of a pendant can be
incorporated into an overall necklace makes it not always accurate to
treat them as separate items.

Pendants are among the oldest recorded types of bodily adornment. Stone,
shell, pottery, and more perishable materials were used. Ancient
Egyptians commonly wore pendants, some shaped like hieroglyphs.

Pendants can have several functions, which may be combined:

-   Award (i.e., Scouting Ireland Chief Scout's Award, Order of
    CÃºChulainn)
-   Identification (i.e., religious symbols, sexual symbols, symbols of
    rock bands)
-   Ornamentation
-   Ostentation (i.e., jewels).
-   Protection (i.e., amulets, religious symbols)
-   Self-affirmation (i.e., initials, names)

The many specialized types of pendants include lockets which open, often
to reveal an image, and pendilia, which hang from larger objects of
metalwork.

## Types\[edit\]

Throughout the ages, pendants have come in a variety of forms to serve a
variety of purposes.

### Amulet\[edit\]

Though amulets come in many forms, a wearable amulet worn around the
neck or on the arm or leg in the form of a pendant is the most common.
These are objects believed to possess magical or spiritual power to
protect the wearer from danger or dispel evil influences.

### Talisman\[edit\]

Similar to an amulet, a talisman is an object believed to possess
supernatural traits. However, while an amulet is strictly a defensive
object, a talisman is meant to confer special benefits or powers upon
the wearer.

### Locket\[edit\]

A locket is a small object that opens to reveal a space which serves to
hold a small object, usually a photograph or a curl of hair. They
typically come in the form of a pendant hanging from a necklace, though
they will occasionally be hung from a charm bracelet.

### Medallion\[edit\]

A medallion is most often a coin-shaped piece of metal worn as a pendant
around the neck or pinned onto clothing. These are generally granted as
awards, recognitions, or religious blessings.

### Painting\[edit\]

Main article: Pendant painting

Pendant is the name given to one of two paintings conceived as a pair.

### Functional pendants\[edit\]

Traveller's sundial pendant (a portable form of astronomical rings) used
to tell time from the sun. Tools worn as pendants include Maori pounamu
pendants. Shepherd's whistles, bosun's whistles, and ocarinas can also
be made as pendants. Portable astronomical and navigational instruments
were made as pendants.

In the first decade of the 21st century, jewellers started to
incorporate USB flash drives into pendants.

### Other types\[edit\]

-   Harness pendant
-

[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")
[Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")