---
title: Torc
permalink: /Torc/
---

A **torc**, also spelled **torq** or **torque**, is a large rigid or
stiff neck ring in metal, made either as a single piece or from strands
twisted together. The great majority are open at the front, although
some had hook and ring closures and a few had mortice and tenon locking
catches to close them. Many seem designed for near-permanent wear and
would have been difficult to remove. Torcs are found in the Scythian,
Illyrian, Thracian, Celtic, and other cultures of the European Iron Age
from around the 8th century BC to the 3rd century AD. For the Iron Age
Celts the gold torc seems to have been a key object, identifying the
wearer as a person of high rank, and many of the finest works of ancient
Celtic art are torcs. The Celtic torc disappears in the Migration
Period, but during the Viking Age torc-style metal necklaces, now mainly
in silver, came back into fashion. Torc styles of neck-ring are found as
part of the jewellery styles of various other cultures and periods.



## Design

The word comes from Latin *torquis* (or *torques*), from *torqueo*, "to
twist", because of the twisted shape many of the rings have. Typically,
neck-rings that open at the front when worn are called "torcs" and those
that open at the back "collars". Smaller bracelets and armlets worn
around the wrist or on the upper arm sometimes share very similar forms.
Torcs were made from single or multiple intertwined metal rods, or
"ropes" of twisted wire. Most of those that have been found are made
from gold or bronze, less often silver, iron or other metals (gold,
bronze and silver survive better than other metals when buried for long
periods). Elaborate examples, sometimes hollow, used a variety of
techniques but complex decoration was usually begun by casting and then
worked by further techniques. The Ipswich Hoard includes unfinished
torcs that give clear evidence of the stages of work. Flat-ended
terminals are called "buffers", and in types like the "fused-buffer"
shape, where what resemble two terminals are actually a single piece,
the element is called a "muff".

## Shapes and decoration

Elegant Bronze Age torc in striated gold, northern France, c. 1200â€“1000
BC, 794 grams Most Achaemenid torcs are thin single round bars with
matching animal heads as the terminals, facing each other at the front.
Some Early Celtic forms break from the normal style of torc by lacking a
break at the throat, and instead are heavily decorated at the continuous
front, with animal elements and short rows of "balusters", rounded
projections coming to a blunt point; these are seen both on the sculpted
torc worn by the stone "Glauberg Warrior" and a gold torc (illustrated)
found in the same oppidum. Later Celtic torcs nearly all return to
having a break at the throat and strong emphasis on the two terminals.
The Vix torc has two very finely made winged horses standing on fancy
platforms projecting sideways just before the terminals, which are
flattened balls under lions' feet. Like other elite Celtic pieces in the
"orientalizing" style, the decoration shows Greek influence but not a
classical style, and the piece may have been made by Greeks in the
Celtic taste, or a "Graeco-Etruscan workshop", or by Celts with foreign
training.

Spiral ribbon torcs, usually with minimal terminals, continue a Bronze
Age type and are found in the Stirling Hoard from Scotland, and
elsewhere: "Although over 110 identifiable British ribbon torcs are
known, the dating of these simple, flexible ornaments is elusive",
perhaps indicating "a long-lived preference for ribbon torcs, which
continued for over 1,000 years". The terminals were often slightly
flared plain round cylinders which were folded back to hook round each
other to fasten the torc at the throat. Other Celtic torcs may use
various ways of forming the hoop: plain or patterned round bars, two or
more bars twisted together, thin round rods (or thick wire) wound round
a core, or woven gold wire. A rarer type twists a single bar with an X
profile.

Except in British looped terminals, the terminals of Iron Age torcs are
usually formed separately. The "buffer" form of terminal was the most
popular in finds from modern France and Germany, with some "fused
buffer" types opening at the rear or sides. In both buffer types and
those with projecting fringes of ornament, decoration in low relief
often continues back round the hoop as far as the midpoint of the side
view. In Iberian torcs thin gold bars are often wound round a core of
base metal, with the rear section a single round section with a
decorated surface.

The c. 150 torcs found in the lands of the Iberian Celts of Galicia
favoured terminals ending in balls coming to a point or small buffer
("pears"), or a shape with a double moulding called *scotiae*. The
pointed ball is also found in northern Italy, where the hoops often end
by being turned back upon themselves so that the terminals face out to
the sides, perhaps enabling closure by hooking round. Both of these
mostly used plain round bars or thin rods wound round a core. In the
terminals of British torcs loops or rings are common, and the main hoop
may be two or more round bars twisted together, or several strands each
made up of twisted wire. Decoration of the terminals in the finest
examples is complex but all abstract. In these two types the hoop itself
normally has no extra decoration, though the large torc in the Irish
Broighter Gold hoard is decorated all round the hoop, the only Irish
example decorated in this way.
[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")
[Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")