---
title: Watch
permalink: /Watch/
---

A **watch** is a timepiece intended to be carried or worn by a person.
It is designed to keep working despite the motions caused by the
person's activities. A **wristwatch** is designed to be worn around the
wrist, attached by a watch strap or other type of bracelet. A **pocket
watch** is designed for a person to carry in a pocket. The study of
timekeeping is known as horology.

Wristwatches and antique pocket watches are often appreciated as jewelry
or as collectible works of art rather than just as timepieces. This has
created several different markets for wristwatches, ranging from very
inexpensive but accurate watches (intended for no other purpose than
telling the correct time) to extremely expensive watches that serve
mainly as personal adornment or as examples of high achievement in
miniaturization and precision mechanical engineering.

Traditionally, men's dress watches appropriate for informal (business),
semi-formal, and formal attire are gold, thin, simple, and plain, but
increasingly rugged, complicated, or sports watches are considered by
some to be acceptable for such attire. Some dress watches have a
cabochon on the crown and many women's dress watches have faceted
gemstones on the face, bezel, or bracelet. Some are made entirely of
faceted sapphire (corundum).

Many fashions and department stores offer a variety of less-expensive,
trendy, "costume" watches (usually for women), many of which are similar
in quality to basic quartz timepieces but which feature bolder designs.
In the 1980s, the Swiss Swatch company hired graphic designers to
redesign a new annual collection of non-repairable watches.
[Category:Armwear](/Category:Armwear "wikilink")
[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")
[Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")