---
title: Cleanroom suit
permalink: /Cleanroom_suit/
---

[thumb\|250px\|Technicians wearing clean room suits inspect a
[semiconductor
wafer](Wafer_(electronics) "wikilink")](/Image:Cleanroom_suit.jpg "wikilink")
A **cleanroom suit**, **clean room suit**, or **bunny suit**,[1][2] is
an overall garment worn in a [cleanroom](/cleanroom "wikilink"), an
environment with a controlled level of contamination. One common type is
an all-in-one [coverall](/coverall "wikilink") worn by
[semiconductor](/semiconductor "wikilink") and
[nanotechnology](/nanotechnology "wikilink") line production workers,
technicians, and process / equipment engineers, as well as people in
similar roles creating sterile products for the [medical
device](/medical_device "wikilink") industry.

The suit covers the wearer to prevent skin and hair being shed into a
clean room environment. The suit may be in one piece or consist of
several separate garments worn tightly together. The suit incorporates
both boots and hood. It must also incorporate a properly fitted
[bouffant](/bouffant "wikilink") cap or [mob cap](/mob_cap "wikilink").

More advanced designs with face covers were introduced in the 1990s
(like the [Intel](/Intel "wikilink") fab worker-style suits seen on the
[Pentium](/Pentium "wikilink") product advertisements).

Suits are usually deposited in a store after being contaminated for dry
cleaning, autoclaving and/or repair.

Similar suits are worn in the
[containment](/Containment_building "wikilink") areas of [nuclear power
plants](/nuclear_power_plant "wikilink"). These suits consist of the
main garment, hood, thin cotton gloves, rubber gloves, plastic bags over
normal work shoes, and rubber booties. The wrists and ankles are taped
down with masking tape. Occasionally a plastic raincoat is also worn.
Removal of the garments (into several barrels) is a complicated process
which must be performed in an exact sequence. Often a [health
physicist](/health_physics "wikilink") is present in the work area to
observe good anti-contamination practices.[3]

<File:Gowning.jpg%7CPictorial> demonstration of gowning
<File:De-Gowning.jpg%7CPictorial> demonstration of de-gowning

## References

[Category:Environmental suits](/Category:Environmental_suits "wikilink")
[Category:Cleanroom
technology](/Category:Cleanroom_technology "wikilink")
[Category:Gowns](/Category:Gowns "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3] [Pictorial demonstration of
gowning](http://www.pcs-clean.com/gowning-degowning.html)