![](Vintage_aloha_shirt.JPG "fig:Vintage_aloha_shirt.JPG") The **Aloha
shirt**, also referred to as a **Hawaiian shirt**, is a style of dress
shirt originating in [Hawaii](Hawaii "wikilink"). They are collared and
buttoned dress shirts, usually short-sleeved and cut from printed
fabric. They are often worn untucked, but can be worn tucked in as well.
They are not only casual, informal wear, but serve as formal business
attire in Hawaii.

"Aloha Friday", a now-common tradition of celebrating the end of the
workweek by wearing more casual attire on Fridays, initially grew out of
an effort to promote Aloha shirts.[1]

## General description

The Aloha dress shirts are printed, mostly short-sleeved, and collared.
They usually have buttons, sometimes for the entire length of the dress
shirt and sometimes just down to the chest (pullover). They usually have
a left chest pocket sewn in, often with attention to ensure the printed
pattern remains continuous. Aloha shirts may be worn by men or women;
women's Aloha shirts usually have a lower-cut,
[v-neck](Shirt#Neck "wikilink") style.

The lower hems are straight,[2] and the shirts are often with the
shirt-tails hanging out, rather than tucked in. Wearing a untucked shirt
was possibly influenced by the local Filipinos who wore shirt-tail out,
and called these *bayau* meaning "friend".[3] The dress code used to be
more conservative. In the 1950s, the shirt became allowed as business
attire for Aloha week, but only if worn tucked in.[4] It is a matter of
personal taste to wear it tucked in or out.[5]

Traditional men's Aloha shirts, manufactured for local Hawaiian
residents, are usually adorned with traditional Hawaiian quilt designs,
[tapa](tapa_cloth "wikilink") designs, and simple floral patterns in
more muted colors. Contemporary Aloha shirts may have prints that do not
feature any traditional Hawaiian quilt or floral designs but instead may
incorporate drinks, palm trees, surf boards or other island tropical
elements arranged in the same pattern as a traditional Aloha shirt.

It has been observed that locals ([Kamaāina](Kama'aina "wikilink"))
tended to shy away from the garishness of Aloha shirts as "too wild"
when they first appeared, and their tendencies to prefer less
ostentatious designs remain today. Whereas tourists (visitors) embraced
wearing designs of many bright colors.[6] An example of the type of
shirt the locals may prefer includes the "reverse print"; these shirts
are often printed on the interior, resulting in the muted color on the
exterior.

## History

![](Vintage_aloha-shirt-quilt.JPG "fig:Vintage_aloha-shirt-quilt.JPG")
According to some sources, the origin of Aloha shirts can be traced to
the 1920s or the early 1930s,[7] when the Honolulu-based dry goods store
"Musa-Shiya the Shirtmaker" under the proprietorship of Kōichirō
Miyamoto,[8] started making shirts out of colorful Japanese prints.[9]
It has also been contended that the Aloha shirt was devised in the early
1930s by Chinese merchant Ellery Chun of "King-Smith Clothiers and Dry
Goods", a store in [Waikiki](Waikiki "wikilink").[10] Although this
claim has been described as a myth reinforced by repeated telling,[11]
Chun may have been the first to mass-produce[12] or to maintain the
ready-to-wear in stock to be sold off the shelf.[13][14] The identity of
the true creator of the Aloha shirt may never be known, according to
Aloha shirt expert Dale Hope.[15]

The name "Aloha shirt" appeared later. By 1935 and 1936, the word
"Aloha" was being attached to various sorts of Hawaiian products, so
calling the garments "Aloha shirts" was hardly original. The term Aloha
shirt first appeared in print in an advertisement for Musa-Shiya in the
June 28, 1935 issue of *[The Honolulu
Advertiser](The_Honolulu_Advertiser "wikilink")* newspaper.[16] However,
Ellery Chun is sometimes credited for coining the term,[17] perhaps in
1933;[18] Chun's store reportedly carried window signs that said "Aloha
shirts".[19][20] The term "Aloha sportswear" was registered as a
[trademark](trademark "wikilink") by Chun's company in 1936,[21]
followed by Chun trademarking "Aloha Shirt" in 1937 and owning the
rights to this appellation for the next 20 years.

![](Tori_Richard_Aloha_Shirts_in_a_Store.JPG "fig:Tori_Richard_Aloha_Shirts_in_a_Store.JPG")
aloha shirts in a store\]\]

Within years, major designer labels sprang up all over Hawaii and began
manufacturing and selling Aloha shirts en masse. By the end of the
1930s, 450 people were employed in an industry worth $600,000
annually.[22] Two notable manufacturers of this period are Kamehameha
and Branfleet (later Kahala), both founded in 1936.[23] Retail chains in
Hawaii, including mainland based ones, may mass-produce a single aloha
shirt design for employee uniforms.

After [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), many servicemen and
servicewomen returned to the United States from Asia and the Pacific
islands with aloha shirts made in Hawaii since the 1930s.[24] One
significant manufacturer was [Shaheen](Alfred_Shaheen "wikilink"), which
began business in 1948.[25] Following Hawaii's statehood in 1959, when
extant tropical prints came to be regarded as rather tacky, designer
[Alfred Shaheen](Alfred_Shaheen "wikilink") became noted for producing
aloha shirts of higher chic and quality, and [Elvis
Presley](Elvis_Presley "wikilink") wore a Shaheen-designed red aloha on
the album cover for *[Blue Hawaii](Blue_Hawaii_(soundtrack) "wikilink")*
(1961).[26][27] In 1956, [Tori Richard](Tori_Richard "wikilink"), a
well-known brand of Alohas was established.[28][29] [Reyn
Spooner](Reyn_Spooner "wikilink") (or, rather, its precursor, Spooner's
of Waikiki) also established business in 1956.[30]

### Exports

Garments manufactured in Hawaii could bear "Made in Hawaii" labels
before [statehood](statehood "wikilink") (1959), and even afterwards,
their sales to mainland USA continued to be referred to as
"exports".[31]

Aloha shirts tend to be referred to as "Hawaiian shirts" by the populace
from the mainland United States,[32] and are often brilliantly colored
with floral patterns or generic
[Polynesian](Polynesian_culture "wikilink") motifs.

The Aloha shirt is currently the premier textile export of the Hawaii
manufacturing industry.

## Aloha dress codes

### Aloha Week

![](Aloha_Festivals_Floral_Parade-_Niklaus_Schweitzer_(a0002608)_(8014113663).jpg "fig:Aloha_Festivals_Floral_Parade-_Niklaus_Schweitzer_(a0002608)_(8014113663).jpg")
In 1946, the Honolulu Chamber of Commerce funded a study of aloha shirts
and designs for comfortable business clothing worn during the hot
Hawaiian summers. The [City and County of
Honolulu](City_and_County_of_Honolulu "wikilink") passed a resolution
allowing their employees to wear sport shirts from June–October. City
employees were not allowed to wear aloha shirts for business until the
creation of the [Aloha Week](Aloha_Week "wikilink") festival in 1947.
The Aloha Week festival was motivated by both cultural and economic
concerns: First held at [Ala Moana Park](Ala_Moana_Park "wikilink") in
October, the festival revived interest in ancient Hawaiian music,
dancing, sports, and traditions. There was a [holoku](holoku "wikilink")
ball, a floral parade, and a [makahiki](makahiki "wikilink") festival
attended by 8,000 people. Economically, the week-long event first
attracted visitors during October – traditionally a slow month for
tourism – which benefited the Hawaiian fashion industry as they supplied
the [muumuu](muumuu "wikilink") and aloha shirts worn for the
celebration. Aloha Week expanded in 1974 to six islands, and was
lengthened to a month. In 1991, Aloha Week was renamed to [Aloha
Festivals](Aloha_Festivals "wikilink").[33]

In the end, Aloha Week had a direct influence on the resulting demand
for alohawear, and was responsible for supporting local clothing
manufacturing: locals needed the clothing for the festivals, and soon
people in Hawaii began wearing the clothing in greater numbers on more
of a daily basis. Hawaii's fashion industry was relieved, as they were
initially worried that popular clothing from the mainland United States
would eventually replace aloha attire.

### Aloha Friday

In 1962, a professional manufacturing association known as the Hawaiian
Fashion Guild began to promote aloha shirts and clothing for use in the
workplace, particularly as business attire. In a campaign called
"Operation Liberation", the Guild distributed two aloha shirts to every
member of the [Hawaii House of
Representatives](Hawaii_House_of_Representatives "wikilink") and the
[Hawaii Senate](Hawaii_Senate "wikilink"). Subsequently, a resolution
passed in the Senate recommending aloha attire be worn throughout the
summer, beginning on [Lei Day](May_Day "wikilink"). The wording of the
resolution spoke of letting "the male populace return to 'aloha attire'
during the summer months for the sake of comfort and in support of the
50th state's garment industry".

In 1965, Bill Foster, Sr., president of the Hawaii Fashion Guild, led
the organization in a campaign lobbying for "Aloha Friday", a day
employers would allow men to wear aloha shirts on the last business day
of the week a few months out of the year. Aloha Friday officially began
in 1966,[34] and young adults of the 1960s embraced the style, replacing
the formal business wear favored by previous generations. By 1970, aloha
wear had gained acceptance in Hawaii as business attire for any day of
the week. Unlike the [court dress](court_dress "wikilink") required in
most jurisdictions, attorneys in Hawaii may be allowed to wear aloha
shirts in court, though this varies among individual courts.[35]

Hawaii's custom of Aloha Friday slowly spread east to California,
continuing around the globe until the 1990s, when it became known as
[Casual Friday](Casual_Friday "wikilink"). Today in Hawaii, alohawear is
worn as business attire for any day of the week,[36] and "Aloha Friday"
is generally used to refer to the last day of the work week. Now
considered Hawaii's term for "Thank God It's Friday" (TGIF),[37] the
phrase was used by Kimo Kahoano and Paul Natto in their 1982 song, "It's
Aloha Friday, No Work 'til Monday",[38] heard every Friday on Hawaii
radio stations across the state.

### Aloha attire

The related concept of "aloha attire" stems from the Aloha shirt.
Semi-formal functions such as weddings, birthday parties, and dinners
are often designated as "aloha attire", meaning that men wear Aloha
shirts and women wear [muumuu](muumuu "wikilink") or other tropical
prints. Because Hawaii tends to be more casual, it is rarely appropriate
to attend such functions in full evening wear like on the mainland;[39]
instead, aloha attire is seen as the happy medium between excessive
formality and casual wear (i.e., [business
casual](business_casual "wikilink")).

## See also

-   [Barong Tagalog](Barong_Tagalog "wikilink") – formal Filipino shirt
    made of Pineapple fibre
-   [Batik](Batik "wikilink") – Indonesian and Malaysian shirt worn
    casually or as business attire
-   [Bowling shirt](Bowling_shirt "wikilink")
-   [Camp Shirt](Camp_shirt "wikilink")
-   [Guayabera](Guayabera "wikilink") – Caribbean shirt worn casually or
    as business attire
-   [Kariyushi shirt](Kariyushi_shirt "wikilink") – Okinawan shirt worn
    casually or as business attire
-   [Tori Richard](Tori_Richard "wikilink") – Aloha shirt brand
-   [Reyn Spooner](Reyn_Spooner "wikilink") – Aloha shirt brand
-   [Jams](Jams_(clothing_line) "wikilink") – Aloha shirt brand

## Explanatory notes

## Notes

## References

-

-

-

-

-

-

## External links

-   [Musa-Shiya The Shirtmaker – Time Magazine
    1926](http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,722899-1,00.html)
-   [Aloha shirts of the University of Hawaii
    Museum](https://www.flickr.com/photos/uhmuseum/sets/72157622839041742/)

[Category:American fashion](Category:American_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Symbols of Hawaii](Category:Symbols_of_Hawaii "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink") [Category:Surf
culture](Category:Surf_culture "wikilink") [Category:1930s
fashion](Category:1930s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1950s
fashion](Category:1950s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1960s
fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Textile arts of
Hawaii](Category:Textile_arts_of_Hawaii "wikilink") [Category:History of
fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9] apud

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39] Dale Hope: *The Aloha shirt* with a different year of introduction.