![](Putting_on_a_bench_shirt.jpg "Putting_on_a_bench_shirt.jpg")

A **bench shirt**is a stiff supportive [shirt](shirt "wikilink"), used
to improve performance in the [bench press](bench_press "wikilink"),
most often in [powerlifting](powerlifting "wikilink") competitions.
Bench shirts are usually made of [polyester](polyester "wikilink"),
[denim](denim "wikilink"), or [canvas](canvas "wikilink") and come in
single- or multi-ply thicknesses. The extremely tight fit of a bench
shirt supports the weightlifter's shoulders and [deltoid
muscles](deltoid_muscle "wikilink").[1]

Different [powerlifting
federations](Powerlifting#International_Federations "wikilink") have
different rules governing allowed equipment—for example, the only
supportive equipment allowed by the 100% Raw Powerlifting Federation for
bench press is a leather belt,[2] whereas the International Powerlifting
Federation stipulates that support shirts must be "of one ply stretch
material".[3] As the same lifter's performance may vary significantly
depending on the presence and design of a bench shirt (for example,
[Scot Mendelson](Scot_Mendelson "wikilink"), whose shirted bench press
record is 1030 lbs,[4] while his unshirted best is 715 lbs), records
across different federations or categories may not be directly
comparable. A bench press performed without the usage of a bench shirt
is referred to as a "raw" or "unequipped" lift.

## References

## External links

-

-

[Category:Powerlifting](Category:Powerlifting "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink") [Category:Weight training
equipment](Category:Weight_training_equipment "wikilink")

[1] Levin, Josh, "[One Giant Lift for Mankind: The race for the
1,000-pound bench press.](http://www.slate.com/id/2104915/)", *Slate,* 9
Aug. 2004. Retrieved 8 August 2007.

[2] 100% Raw Powerlifting Federation
[Rules](http://www.rawpowerlifting.com/pdf/rules.pdf) (PDF), p. 4.
Retrieved 8 August 2007.

[3] International Powerlifting Federation [Technical
Rules](http://www.powerlifting-ipf.com/Technical-Rules.50.0.html) (PDF),
p. 12. Retrieved 4 January 2010.

[4] [All-Time Powerlifting
Records](http://www.powerliftingwatch.com/records/shw-men) ,
*Powerlifting Watch.*