![](Woman_in_a_White_Crop_Top.jpg "fig:Woman_in_a_White_Crop_Top.jpg") A
**crop top** (also **cropped top**, **belly shirt**, **half shirt**,
**midriff-baring shirt**, **midriff-baring top**, **tummy top**, **short
shirt**, and **cutoff shirt**) is a [top](Top_(clothing) "wikilink")
that exposes the waist, navel, or stomach.[1]

## History

### Women

The early history of the crop top intersects with cultural views towards
the [midriff](Midriff#Culture_and_history "wikilink"), starting with the
performance of "[Little Egypt](Little_Egypt_(dancer) "wikilink")" at the
[1893 Chicago World's Fair](1893_Chicago_World's_Fair "wikilink").[2]
Although the crop top started gaining prominence in the fashion industry
during the 1930s[3] and 1940s[4][5][6][7] — the latter in particular due
to fabric rationing in [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink")[8] — it
was largely confined to swimwear at the time. It was not until the
sexual revolution of the late 1960s and early 1970s that it started to
achieve widespread acceptance,[9][10] worn by celebrities such as
[Barbara Eden](Barbara_Eden "wikilink")[11] and [Jane
Birkin](Jane_Birkin "wikilink").[12][13] A variant style, the tied-up
top or knotted shirt,[14] also started appearing in 1940s fashion[15]
and spread in popularity during the 1960s.

In the 1980s, cutoff crop tops became more common as part of the
[aerobics](aerobics "wikilink") craze and as a result of the popularity
of the movie *[Flashdance](Flashdance "wikilink")*. Singer
[Madonna](Madonna_(entertainer) "wikilink") wore a mesh crop top in her
music video for the song "[Lucky
Star](Lucky_Star_(Madonna_song) "wikilink")".[16] In the 2010s, the crop
top experienced a revival due to the popularity of 1990s retro
fashion.[17][18][19]

### Men

Crop tops have been worn by men[20] since the 1970s.[21] Men have not
had the same legal restriction placed upon baring their navels as women
have.[22]

The protective gear of [American football](American_football "wikilink")
with no shirt resembles a crop top. Eventually cropped jerseys became
available which carried over to several 1980s broadcasts. Men also
started to wear crop tops regardless of sport. Acceptance for men
wearing no shirt could be seen to eliminate the need for a crop top.
Various crop tops have been worn by rappers as well as American football
athletes. However, in 2015 the [NCAA](NCAA "wikilink")[23][24] has
increased restrictions on men wearing crop tops,[25][26][27][28] which
also includes rolling up longer jerseys, giving no reason for the
change.[29][30][31][32]

Since the mid-2010s, the male crop top has seen a major resurgence in
popularity,[33] including prominent celebrity figures such as footballer
Ezekiel Elliott,[34] rapper [Kid Cudi](Kid_Cudi "wikilink"),[35] rock
star [Josh Kiszka](Josh_Kiszka "wikilink"), and actors [Matthew
McConaughey](Matthew_McConaughey "wikilink") and [Zac
Efron](Zac_Efron "wikilink").[36]



[File:Hüfthose.jpg\|Woman](File:Hüfthose.jpg%7CWoman) wearing a white
crop top <File:Bologna> Pride, 2012 (cropped).jpg\|A man wearing an
improvised crop top <File:SagatinLaZombietest.jpg%7CA> man wearing a
cropped vest <File:Woman> with tied shirt.jpg\|Woman in tied shirt

## See also

-   [Hip-huggers](Hip-huggers "wikilink")
-   [Low-rise pants](Low-rise_pants "wikilink")
-   [Dudou](Dudou "wikilink") and [Yếm](Yếm "wikilink"), East Asian tops
    that sometimes function as croptops

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Tops (clothing)](Category:Tops_(clothing) "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink") [Category:1970s
fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1980s
fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]