![](Fiberloid_shirt_dickey.jpg "fig:Fiberloid_shirt_dickey.jpg")
![](1915_Vorhemd_anagoria.JPG "fig:1915_Vorhemd_anagoria.JPG")

A **dickey** (alternatively written as **dickie** or **dicky**;[1]
sometimes known in American English as a **tuxedo front** or **tux
front**) is a type of false [shirt](shirt "wikilink")-front - originally
known as a detachable [bosom](bosom "wikilink") - designed to be worn
with a [tuxedo](black_tie "wikilink") or men's [white
tie](white_tie "wikilink"), usually attached to the collar and then
tucked into the waistcoat or [cummerbund](cummerbund "wikilink"). Better
dickeys have a trouser tab at the end to secure them down, preventing
the dickey from popping out. The rigid plastic dickey came into fashion
in the latter years of the 19th century, and was one of the first
successful commercial applications of [celluloid](celluloid "wikilink").

The invention of the dickey was to make the bosom front of a full dress
shirt a separate entity in itself, like the detachable collar, so it
could be laundered and starched more easily than a traditional shirt
with the bosom attached. The use of the dickey was considered bad style
by traditionalists and had fallen out of use. Shirts with an attached
bosom are now rare in themselves since traditional evening dress is no
longer regularly worn.

The etymology can be attributed to [Cockney rhyming
slang](Cockney_rhyming_slang "wikilink") where a "dicky dirt" is a
shirt. Additionally, British office workers were required to wear suits,
but their wages made it difficult to keep a fresh supply of laundered
shirts. It was common practice, especially by the 1850s, to use dickeys
as a way of covering dirty shirts.[2]

## Dickeys – celluloid, cardboard, and cloth

### Celluloid (hard plastic)

[Celluloid](Celluloid "wikilink") dickeys were popular for their
waterproof and stain-resistant properties. Unlike traditional cloth
shirt-fronts, they remained sleek, bright white, and did not wilt or
wrinkle. Celluloid dickeys simulated the look of a formal shirt bib for
day and evening wear. They were designed in a variety of patents, such
as: rounded, flat-end, no restraints, a restraint tab at the end of the
bib or side straps that tied at the wearer's back. For this reason, they
were popular with [entertainers](show_business "wikilink"),
[musicians](music "wikilink"), and other performers. Nevertheless, they
were frequently maligned and spoofed for their stiffness,
unmanageability, and tendency to pop out of place. In one notable
[Looney Tunes segment](Long-Haired_Hare "wikilink"), [Bugs
Bunny](Bugs_Bunny "wikilink") conducts an arrogant opera singer and
makes him hold a note so long that his dickey snaps out of his waistcoat
and rolls up to his throat. "The flapping dickey", a famous
[Vaudeville](Vaudeville "wikilink") [cliché](cliché "wikilink"),
involves a dickey which has been intentionally rigged to flap in a
comical fashion.

### Cardboard

Cardboard dickeys were worn in theater and service professions to save
money from using linen formal shirts for uniforms. Examples of
professions that used cardboard dickeys include waiters, hotel managers,
doormen, bellboys, limo drivers, and servants. Cardboard dickeys are
still manufactured in the United States by [Amazon
Drygoods](http://www.amazondrygoods.com/).

### Cloth

Cloth dickeys simulate many different styles, some often seen examples
include dress shirt front and collar, formal frilled shirt front
(popular in the mid seventies with powder blue tuxedos) and most
commonly in modern times as false [turtleneck](turtleneck "wikilink")
sweater fronts. Cloth dickeys are also often used in marching band
uniforms.

Hard plastic dickeys have long since gone out of manufacture and
fashion, but cloth [turtleneck](Polo_neck "wikilink")-style dickeys are
still sometimes seen.

## Dickeys in women’s wear

The dickey, traditionally worn by men, made the transition to women's
wear around 1943.[3] While women may have worn dickeys before this time,
ads in *Vogue New York* can be seen promoting dickeys in the February
1943 issue. Dickeys were said to “enliven your new suit or rejuvenate
your old”. Women's dickeys were made from cotton or rayon and
embellished with embroidery, lace, jabots, and ruffles. They were priced
between $2-$3 at the time.[4]

Patterns for women's dickeys can also be found dating to 1944, with
Butterick's patterns providing eight variations on the dickey.[5] While
dickeys have gone in and out of style over time, they've made a recent
resurgence in the fashion world.

## Dickeys in contemporary fashion

Recently, dickeys have been rising in popularity. In 2011, dickeys and
menswear inspired lingerie became popular as a break from minimalist and
restrictive fashion at the time.[6] At the same time, detachable collars
and dickeys were showing up on the runway as peter pan collars.[7] In
2013, the materials used for dickies was expanding from knits and
cotton, to leather and silk.[8] The 2014 fall winter season saw the
dickey return as a winter accessory used to keep the neck warm.[9] By
2015, contemporary designers, like Michael Kors, adopted the dickey in
his resort line. In an interview with *InStyle* Magazine, Kors said the
dickey was a way to add versatility to a look, without adding bulk.[10]

The rise of the dickey in pop culture has also encouraged the rise in
popularity. For example, on the TV series *[The Big Bang
Theory](The_Big_Bang_Theory "wikilink")*, worn by the character [Howard
Wolowitz](Howard_Wolowitz "wikilink"), as well as in *[Dinner for
Schmucks](Dinner_for_Schmucks "wikilink")*, where the character Therman
Murch (played by [Zach Galifianakis](Zach_Galifianakis "wikilink")) wore
an orange turtleneck dickey. [Cousin Eddie](Cousin_Eddie "wikilink")
(played by [Randy Quaid](Randy_Quaid "wikilink")) in *[National
Lampoon's Christmas
Vacation](National_Lampoon's_Christmas_Vacation "wikilink")* wore a dark
green turtleneck dickey underneath an ivory sweater. The character [Liz
Lemon](Liz_Lemon "wikilink") wore a "sweater" type dickey on the opening
episode of season 6 on the TV series *[30
Rock](30_Rock "wikilink")*.[11]. The character Kent was wearing a dickey
in the end scenes of the movie *[Real Genius](Real_Genius "wikilink")*.

## Cultural dress

The dickey is not just a facet of men's wear clothing, it is also used
in certain types of cultural dress.

### Armenia

Historically, Armenian dress consisted of layers, a result of the
variability of the weather, with short and hot summers and long and cold
winters. Layers could be switched out easily when changes in the weather
occurred. One component of this layering was a dicky style shirt that
was heavily embroidered to cover the chest if the woman's outer dress
was low cut.[12]

### Greece

It is traditional for Greek widows to wear black to signify their
mourning. Historically, widows in certain regions of Greece,
specifically Peloponnese and Euboea, “wore a plain white chemise and an
unembroidered sigouni with a black *dickey*, black headscarf and black
apron.”[13]

### Sámi People (Northern Europe, Western Russia)

Both men and women of the Sámi culture, particularly in the central and
southern parts of the Sámi region, wear dickeys under certain tunic
styles. The tunics often have a V-neck opening that the dicky is worn
under. The dickeys are usually rectangular and are made from wool.
Traditionally, women wear red wool while men wear blue. The dickey is
usually decorated with reindeer skin around the edges and metallic
thread and glass beads in the center. The purpose is for the dickey to
be the focal point of the outfit.[14]

## See also

-   [Chemisette](Chemisette "wikilink")

## References

[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:Formal wear](Category:Formal_wear "wikilink") [Category:Tops
(clothing)](Category:Tops_(clothing) "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink")

[1] Merriam-Webster, Oxford English Dictionary

[2]

[3] Fashion: A dickey does it. (1943, Feb 01). *Vogue, 101*, 133.
Retrieved from https://search.proquest.com/docview/879222990

[4]

[5] Butterick. *Collars/Cuffs/Dickeys* \[Original work found in
Commercial Pattern Archive (CoPA), Rhode Island\]. Retrieved May 23,
2017, from
https://www.bloomsburyfashioncentral.com/products/berg-fashion-library/museum/commercial-pattern-archive-copa/collars-cuffs-dickeys
(Original work created in 1944)

[6] Costume Party. (2011, May 16). *WGSN*. Retrieved from:
https://www.wgsn.com/content/board_viewer/#/15817/page/6

[7] Paging Peter Pan. (2011, August, 8). *WGSN*. Retrieved from:
https://www.wgsn.com/content/board_viewer/#/16900/page/1

[8] The Dickey. (2013, August 15). WGSN. Retrieved from:
https://www.wgsn.com/content/board_viewer/#/33311/page/2

[9] Cold Weather Accessories F/W 14. (2013, December 19). *WGSN*.
Retrieved from:
https://www.wgsn.com/content/board_viewer/#/50386/page/11

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]