![](Camisade_puño_doble.jpg "Camisade_puño_doble.jpg")

A **dress shirt**, **button shirt**, **button-front**, **button-front
shirt**, or **button-up shirt** is a garment with a
[collar](Collar_(clothing) "wikilink") and a full-length opening at the
front, which is fastened using [buttons](buttons "wikilink") or [shirt
studs](shirt_stud "wikilink"). A **button-down** or **button-down
shirt** is a dress shirt which has a button-down collar – a collar
having the ends fastened to the shirt with buttons.[1]

A dress shirt is normally made from woven [cloth](cloth "wikilink"), and
is often accompanied by a [tie](Necktie "wikilink"),
[jacket](jacket "wikilink"), [suit](suit_(clothing) "wikilink"), or
[formalwear](formalwear "wikilink"), but a dress shirt may also be worn
more casually.

In [British English](British_English "wikilink"), "dress shirt" ("formal
shirt" or "tuxedo shirt" in American English) means specifically the
more formal evening garment worn with [black-](black_tie "wikilink") or
[white-tie](white_tie "wikilink"). Some of these formal shirts have
stiff fronts and [detachable collars](detachable_collar "wikilink")
attached with [collar studs](collar_stud "wikilink").

## History

![](Joris_Vekemans_-_de_Vos.jpg "fig:Joris_Vekemans_-_de_Vos.jpg")
![](Dietrich_von_Keyserlingk.JPG "fig:Dietrich_von_Keyserlingk.JPG") in
the 18th century\]\] Traditionally dress shirts were worn by men and
boys, whereas women and girls often wore [blouses](blouse "wikilink")
or, sometimes, known as [chemises](chemise "wikilink"). However, in the
mid-1800s, they also became an item of women's clothing and are worn by
both sexes today.[2]

## Components

A shirt has several components: A one-piece back, which is usually
pleated, gathered, or eased into a section of fabric in the upper part
of the back behind the neck and over the shoulders known as the yoke
(either one-piece or seamed vertically in the middle); one-piece sleeves
with [plackets](plackets "wikilink") at the wrist, or else short-sleeved
(cut off above the elbow), though this is not traditional; a band of
fabric around each wrist known as a cuff; the collar, a strip around the
neck, which is normally a turndown collar, with the strip folded down
away from the neck, leaving two points at the front, the width of which
is known as the spread; and finally two front panels which overlap
slightly down the middle on the placket to fasten with buttons (or
rarely [shirt studs](shirt_studs "wikilink")).

### Collars

![](Arnaud_Rousseau_Dress_Shirt_with_a_Modern_Spread_Collar.jpg "fig:Arnaud_Rousseau_Dress_Shirt_with_a_Modern_Spread_Collar.jpg")
There are various styles of collar, which is the primary indicator of
the formality of a shirt.[3] Those discussed here are all attached
collars, not styles specific to [detachable
collars](detachable_collar "wikilink"). The very top button is number 1.

-   Spread collars measure from around between the collar points, and
    the wider collars are often referred to as *cutaway* or *Windsor*
    collars after the [Duke of
    Windsor](Edward_VIII_of_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink"). This city
    style is more formal, though it is common in Europe, and predominant
    in the UK.
-   Point, straight, or small collars are narrow, with between the
    points of the collar.
-   Button-down collars, or "sport collars" have points fastened down by
    buttons on the front of the shirt. Introduced by [Brooks
    Brothers](Brooks_Brothers "wikilink") in 1896, they were patterned
    after the shirts of [polo](polo "wikilink") players and were used
    exclusively on sports shirts until the 1950s in America. It is still
    considered a more sporting style, and, particularly outside America,
    traditionally dressed men still do not wear suits with this style of
    collar.

The less-common styles below were all once common, but have waned in
popularity.

-   Eyelet collars require a barbell-style [collar
    bar](collar_bar "wikilink") to join the small stitched hole on each
    point.
-   Tab collars are point collars with two strips of fabric extending
    from the middle of the collar and joined behind the tie. These lift
    the tie, giving an arc effect similar to a [pinned
    collar](collar_pin "wikilink"). The tabs can be closed with a metal
    snap, button or stud.
-   Club collars have rounded edges, and were very popular in the first
    few decades of the twentieth century. They have recently received a
    surge in popularity due to television shows like *[Mad
    Men](Mad_Men "wikilink")*.
-   The varsity is a type of spread collar in which the points curve
    outward from the placket of the shirt.
-   Shirts designed to take a detachable collar have a tunic collar,
    which is a low standing band of fabric around the neck, with a hole
    at the front and back for the [collar
    studs](collar_stud "wikilink").

Contrast collar shirts are occasionally made, which are white collars on
a coloured or patterned shirt. These are worn for a variety of reasons,
such as to offset certain complexions;[4] because of a tradition started
by [detachable collars](detachable_collar "wikilink"), where it is
impractical to have many collars in different matching colours; and
finally because when a collar is replaced it is unlikely an exact colour
match will be found. These collars are generally considered more formal
than matching fabric in shirts that are not white.

### Cuffs

![](Smart_Casual_Dress_Example.jpg "fig:Smart_Casual_Dress_Example.jpg")
The main distinctions between cuffs are whether they require buttons or
[cufflinks](cufflinks "wikilink") to fasten, and whether they are folded
back (*double*) or single. The main resulting types are therefore:

-   Barrel cuffs, the standard style fastened by one or two buttons
    according to taste.
-   Double, or French cuffs, which are more formal, have an extra length
    of sleeve folded back and fastened with links.
-   Single cuffs, the most formal style, usually only worn with formal
    eveningwear, are fastened as double cuffs but are without the fold.

In addition, there are some variations, for example barrel cuffs may be
mitred, with the corner cut off at 45°. Less common styles include the
*Portofino*, or *cocktail* cuff, which is a double cuff closed with
buttons, first made by the [Jermyn Street](Jermyn_Street "wikilink")
shirtmakers [Turnbull & Asser](Turnbull_&_Asser "wikilink"), and later
popularised by the fictional character [James
Bond](James_Bond "wikilink") in the films from 1962 onwards.

### Other features

A high quality traditional shirt has long tails, extending almost to the
knees at the back, and so has seven or eight buttons. The vertical strip
of fabric running down the front opening is called the placket, and
gives a more symmetrical appearance to the joint between the left side,
on top, and the right. This left over right order is also seen in
waistcoat and coat fastenings, though women's clothing buttons the other
way (right over left). The buttonholes, aligned vertically, are placed
on the placket, though the top button and buttons at the bottom of stiff
fronts are aligned horizontally. The buttonholes are one of the few
places where the difference between hand and machine stitching can be
observed while the shirt is being worn, and fashion designers sometimes
use contrasting thread here or on the buttons themselves for extra
impact.

To give extra fullness to the back, there are often
[pleats](pleat "wikilink") where the back panel joins to the yoke. On
some fittings these are not needed, and handmade shirts may feature the
extra fabric being worked continuously into the seam. In America, a box
pleat is common (two pleats together in the centre), while in Britain
the pleats are placed wider out under the shoulders.

The less casual shirts in Britain will have no pockets, but the standard
shirt in America has a single one on the wearer's left side, which is a
sewn-on patch with a plain upper hem, optionally with a single button
for closure. This small pocket is large enough to hold a pack of
[cigarettes](cigarettes "wikilink") or a few pens (a [pocket
protector](pocket_protector "wikilink") can be used). Less formal shirts
may feature larger pockets, dual pockets, or pockets with flap closures;
safari or other military styled shirts often feature two large pockets
with buttoned flaps. Less formal shirts may have small pockets on the
sleeves as well. [Shoulder
straps](Shoulder_strap#Shirt_shoulder_strap "wikilink") are virtually
non-existent on formal shirts, with the exception of military clothing.

Short-sleeved shirts have a plain (no-button) hem above the wearer's
elbow. They are considered a casual summer or tropical option, though
many people wear only the traditional long sleeves in all circumstances.

## Formal shirts

In the UK, the term *dress shirt* is reserved for a particular type of
formal shirt. There are formal day shirts for wearing with [morning
dress](morning_dress "wikilink"), and the white dress shirts used as
eveningwear.

A day dress shirt is fairly similar to a normal shirt, and is usually
white, with a stiff [detachable collar](detachable_collar "wikilink"),
though other designs, such as a vertical blue stripe, are also
appropriate. Double cuffs are most common. This sort of shirt is also
conventionally worn by some barristers and judges.

An evening shirt, for wear with eveningwear, for example as part of
[black](black_tie "wikilink") or [white tie](white_tie "wikilink") has
some unique features. In the U.S., this shirt is often called a *tuxedo
shirt* or *tux shirt*. The shirt is always white.

The shirt required for [white tie](white_tie "wikilink") is very
specific. It should have a [detachable](detachable_collar "wikilink")
[wing collar](wing_collar "wikilink") and be fastened with [shirt
studs](shirt_studs "wikilink") instead of buttons on the front. The
studs are normally [mother of pearl](mother_of_pearl "wikilink") set in
gold or silver, but black [onyx](onyx "wikilink") inlay is also
permissible. The cufflinks should match the studs. The shirt front has
panels made of different material from the rest of the shirt which are
the only parts seen under the waistcoat. The shape of the panels, one on
each side, is either rectangular, or the older U-shape (designed to sit
under the older 1920s U-shaped waistcoats, now largely replaced by the
more modern V-shape). The material for the panels is either layers of
thick plain cotton that is heavily [starched](starch "wikilink") (this
type is often called a *boiled front shirt* as the shirt needs to be put
in boiling water to remove the starch before cleaning), or
[marcella](Piqué_(weaving) "wikilink") (piqué) cotton. Marcella is more
common, but a little less formal, though still appropriate, since it was
originally designed to be used on formal evening shirts, as the ribbing
can pick up more starch and create an even stiffer front. Traditionally,
collarless shirts with a detachable wing collar fastened on with collar
studs have been used, but all-in-one designs are occasionally seen,
though this is considered incorrect and to give a poor appearance by
many.[5][6] [Cuffs](Cuff "wikilink") are single, and heavily starched
(if the front is marcella, the cuffs usually match).

[Black tie](Black_tie "wikilink") offers more leeway. Shirts may be soft
(not starched), which gives the options of unstarched marcella or a
pleated front, as well as the white tie shirts, which may also be worn
with black tie. The collar is still sometimes a stiff high wing collar
(common in America, though the attached variety is more popular there),
or a turndown collar (more frequently seen in Britain). In past decades,
particularly the 1970s, ruffled shirt fronts were made fashionable by
Will Hunter, although they are now out of favour. Dress-studs are
optional, and are onyx set in either silver or gold if used; otherwise
the buttons are normally concealed under a placket. Cufflinks tend to be
as simple and understated as possible, and harmonise with, if not match,
the studs.

The [placket](placket "wikilink") of the shirt is the part that holds
the buttons and the button holes. This is highly regarded as the focal
point of the dress shirt when worn casually. Unfortunately due to the
lack of reinforcement, the weight of the collar will cripple the placket
throughout the day. No amount of starch, ironing, pressing nor does the
type of fabric matter when it comes to combating the collapse.

## Materials

![](Priveeparis-giza-cotton-shirts-india.jpg "fig:Priveeparis-giza-cotton-shirts-india.jpg")
is the most preferred choice with which dress shirts are made due to its
fine quality. Giza cotton is a type of high-end cotton, grown and
harvested in the middle-east.\]\] Shirts are made of woven cloth. The
natural fibers used more commonly in the past were
[cotton](cotton "wikilink") (the most frequent),
[linen](linen "wikilink") (the oldest), [ramie](ramie "wikilink"),
[wool](wool "wikilink") or [silk](silk "wikilink"). Nowadays, artificial
fibers such as [polyester](polyester "wikilink") or polyester blends are
also used, due to their low cost, despite being considered by most
shirtmakers the poorest material, owing to less softness and
breathability.[7] However, while high quality cotton shirts can survive
with care a few decades, a polyester/cotton blend may be used in more
demanding environments. Giza Cotton is a type of high-quality cotton
which is the preferred choice among high-end shirtmakers, because of its
long staple length. Linen produces a cool fabric that wrinkles heavily,
and is mostly used in light summer shirts. Cotton is therefore the
standard material for all but the cheapest shirts. Silk is occasionally
worn, though it is hot to wear and has a marked sheen.

Yarns from these fibers are woven into a variety of different weaves,
the most notable of which include [broadcloth](broadcloth "wikilink"),
with double the number of [warp](warp_(weaving) "wikilink") to
[weft](weft "wikilink") threads, giving a smooth, formal shirting;
[twill](twill "wikilink"), where the tucks of the weft do not line up,
giving a diagonal pattern, a weave used for most country checked (*e.g.*
[Tattersall](Tattersall_(cloth) "wikilink")) shirtings;
[poplin](poplin "wikilink"), with a heavier warp than weft, giving more
formal fabric; and [Oxford](Oxford_(cloth) "wikilink") weaves. Plain
Oxford or pinpoint Oxford weaves are popular as casual fabrics, so are
generally used in combination with a button-down collar, while royal
Oxford is versatile enough to be used on both sporty and formal shirts.
There are many other weaves or variations on these, including
[end-on-end](end-on-end "wikilink") patterns, where alternate white and
coloured threads are used, giving a mottled appearance, or more exotic
weaves, including [voile](voile "wikilink") and
[batiste](batiste "wikilink"), which are extremely light fabrics only
used for summer shirts or on the unseen parts of formal shirts.[8]

The use of pattern and colour is also significant. Originally, in the
[Edwardian era](Edwardian_era "wikilink"), when the modern shirt
emerged, all shirts were white. Gradually more colours were introduced,
including blue, the most popular colour, particularly in lighter shades
such as [Wedgwood](Wedgwood "wikilink"). A full range of colours is now
worn, from pink to yellow. Less traditional shirts are also made with
darker colours, even black, and bright or lighter colours and prints for
very casual wear were popularised after the War by light holiday clothes
such as [Hawaiian shirts](Hawaiian_shirt "wikilink").

The intended use of shirts dictates different choices of pattern. For
example, country shirts are usually checked, with checks of different
size to co-ordinate with [tweeds](Tweed_(cloth) "wikilink") of different
pattern, and featuring one, two, or sometimes more colours of check over
a light cream or white background. For city shirts, plain or striped
designs are more common, most stripes being vertical, while horizontal
stripes are a legitimate option. Herringbone patterns are worn
informally and casually. Some colours, such as purple or pink, are
generally only worn with city shirts. Further, the use of colour is
seasonal, with shades like green being associated more with autumn than
summer ones like yellow. Colours and patterns may be chosen for more
than simply aesthetic reasons, as trends such as [power
dressing](power_dressing "wikilink") (first noted in Molloy, *[Dress for
Success](Dress_for_Success_(book) "wikilink")* \[1975\]) emphasise the
social impact of clothing. For example, a
[City](City_of_London "wikilink") executive might stereotypically wear
strong vertical patterns for meetings to emphasise his authority.

### Non-iron

[Wrinkle-free](Permanent_press "wikilink") shirts have become popular
after being first introduced by [Brooks
Brothers](Brooks_Brothers "wikilink") in 1953.[9]

A resin used for making non-wrinkle shirts releases
[formaldehyde](formaldehyde "wikilink"), which could cause contact
dermatitis for some people - particularly those who have already
developed an allergy; no disclosure requirements exist, and in 2008 the
U.S. [Government Accountability
Office](Government_Accountability_Office "wikilink") tested formaldehyde
in clothing and found that generally the highest levels were in
non-wrinkle shirts and pants.[10]

## Shirt wearing

![](Andrew_Coco_2017.jpg "fig:Andrew_Coco_2017.jpg") A dress shirt is
typically [ironed](Ironing "wikilink") to remove any wrinkles and can be
treated with [starch](starch "wikilink") for added smoothness and
stiffness. There are also cotton shirts available in the market which do
not require ironing.

The hem is tucked into the [trousers](trousers "wikilink"). For
[informal-](informal_(attire) "wikilink") or
[formalwear](formalwear "wikilink"), a
[coat](coat_(clothing) "wikilink") and [tie](necktie "wikilink") (or
[bow tie](bow_tie "wikilink")) are compulsory. When a tie is worn, the
top button of the shirt is fastened, so the tie can fit snugly around
the wearer's neck with a neat appearance.

When a tie is not worn, conventions on buttoning differ globally: in the
United States and the United Kingdom, the top button is virtually never
buttoned if a tie is not worn – but unbuttoning two or more buttons is
seen as overly casual. In France, unbuttoning two buttons is more
common, and politicians appear on TV in this style.

In casual usage, these conventions are often not followed, with many
choosing to wear shirts not tucked in, or leaving the top button undone
with a tie. This is commonly done by children and young men,
particularly as part of [school uniform](school_uniform "wikilink"),
where it is not allowed. Even more casually, some now choose not to iron
their shirts, or use nontraditional 'non-iron' fabrics.

Similarly, as part of more casual work attire, some American men wear
shirts with the top two buttons unbuttoned (buttoned at the third
button), though buttoning at the fourth button is widely seen as too
casual. Accordingly, some shirts are manufactured with a difference at
the second or third button, by way of subtle cue as to where to
button.[11] Most casually, the shirt can be worn entirely unbuttoned,
over a T-shirt.

## Fit

In the US, [ready-to-wear](ready-to-wear "wikilink")
[sizes](clothing_size "wikilink") of dress shirts traditionally consist
of two numbers such as *15½ 34*, meaning that the shirt has a neck in
girth (measured from centre of top button to centre of corresponding
buttonhole) and a sleeve long (measured from midpoint of the back and
shoulders to the wrist). However, to reduce the number of sizes needed
to be manufactured and stocked, an average sleeve length is sometimes
given in the form *15½ 34/35* (indicating a neck in girth and a sleeve).
Since the cuff frequently features two buttons, the cuff diameter can be
reduced so that the cuff does not come down over the hand, allowing the
shirt to fit the shorter length. Since the sleeve and neck size do not
take into account waist size, some shirts are cut wide to accommodate
large belly sizes. Shirts cut for flat stomachs are usually labeled,
"fitted", "tailored fit" "athletic fit" or "trim fit". The terms for
fuller cut shirts are more varied ("Traditional", "Regular" *etc.*) and
are sometimes explained on a shirt maker's website. Additionally,
"Portly" or "Big" are often used for neck sizes of or more. Very casual
button-front shirts are often sized as small, medium, large, and so on.
The meaning of these *ad-hoc* sizes is similarly not standardized and
varies between manufacturers.

In the [bespoke](bespoke "wikilink") (custom-made) industry where each
shirt is made from an individually drafted pattern, these sizing
problems are avoided, though there are still different ways of making
the shirt fit. While many choose to cut the sleeve long and have the
cuff catch on the hand to regulate its length, some prefer the much
harder option of using a high armhole and carefully tailored shape, so
that the cuff can be loose and still sit in exactly the right place
wherever the arm moves.[12]

[Made-to-measure](Made-to-measure "wikilink") shirts may not fit quite
as well as bespoke, but can provide a similar degree of customisation
and fit at a lower cost.

For sixty years, US designers and manufacturers of neckties and dress
shirts were members of the [Men's Dress Furnishings
Association](Men's_Dress_Furnishings_Association "wikilink") but the
trade group shut down in 2008 due to declining membership caused by the
declining numbers of men wearing neckties.[13]

## As part of dress codes

Dress shirts are seen as a potent symbol of manhood, and were formerly
worn by men most times for nearly all activities. Although they have
largely been replaced today by pullover tops such as
[T-shirts](T-shirts "wikilink") or [hoodies](hoodies "wikilink") as
casual wear, they remain overwhelmingly dominant as formal or business
attire, and they are almost always expected (or even required where
[dress codes](dress_codes "wikilink") are enforced) to be worn for such
occasions. This tends to apply even when neckties or suit jackets are
not, or when even [jeans](jeans "wikilink") may be worn in lieu of dress
pants.

## Industrial production

<File:Geoffrey> Beene Dress Shirt production in a RMG factory of
Bangladesh.jpg\| Dress Shirt finished product <File:Dress> Shirt
production Line allocation in a RMG factory of
Bangladesh.JPG\|Production line <File:Dress> Shirt sewing in a RMG
factory of Bangladesh.jpg\|Sewing operation <File:Dress> Shirt quality
checking in a RMG factory of Bangladesh.JPG\|Quality checking
<File:Dress> Shirt Fitting on dummy Front.JPG\|Fitting checking on dummy
<File:Dress> Shirt on Conveyor in a RMG factory of Bangladesh.JPG\|Dress
shirt on conveyor <File:Dress> Shirt Pressing standard in a RMG factory
of Bangladesh.JPG\|Pressing standard

## See also

-   [Shirt](Shirt "wikilink")
-   [Shirtdress](Shirtdress "wikilink") worn by women

## Bibliography

These general works cover most of the material in the article, and are
not referenced by page on all points.

-

-

-

-

## References

[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3] Antongiavanni (2002). p. 101

[4] Flusser (2002). p. 27

[5] Flusser (2002). pp. 238–239

[6] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 174

[7] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 109

[8] Flusser (2002). pp. 135, 277–305

[9] Epaminondas, George, "[The War Over Non-Iron
Shirts](https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-war-over-non-iron-shirts-1462386777)"
*The Wall Street Journal*, May 4, 2016.

[10] [When Wrinkle-Free Clothing Also Means Formaldehyde
Fumes](https://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/11/your-money/11wrinkle.html).
*New York Times*.

[11] [Fashion comes unbuttoned: How low will it
go?](http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/living/2009369701_fashionunbuttoned22.html)
, June 22, 2009, The Seattle Times

[12] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 106

[13]