![](Guernseymen_selling_produce_at_the_Viaer_Marchi.jpg "fig:Guernseymen_selling_produce_at_the_Viaer_Marchi.jpg")
(The Old Market), [Guernsey](Guernsey "wikilink")\]\]

A **guernsey**, or **gansey**, is a seaman's knitted woollen
[sweater](sweater "wikilink"), similar to a
[jersey](Jersey_(clothing) "wikilink"), which originated in the [Channel
Island](Channel_Islands "wikilink") of [the same
name](Guernsey "wikilink"), sometimes known as a **knit-frock** in
[Cornwall](Cornwall "wikilink").[1]

## Origins

The guernsey is the mainstay of Guernsey's knitting industry which can
be dated back to the late 15th century when a royal grant was obtained
to import wool from [England](England "wikilink") and re-export knitted
goods to [Normandy](Normandy "wikilink") and [Spain](Spain "wikilink").
[Peter Heylin](Peter_Heylin "wikilink") described the manufacture and
export of "waste-cotes" during the reign of [Charles
I](Charles_I_of_England "wikilink"). The first use of the name
"guernsey" outside of the island [2] is in the 1851 *[Oxford
Dictionary](Oxford_Dictionary "wikilink")*, but the garment was in use
in the [bailiwick](bailiwick "wikilink") before that.[3]

The guernsey came into being as a garment for fishermen who required a
warm, hard wearing, yet comfortable item of clothing that would resist
the sea spray. The hard twist given to the tightly packed wool fibres in
the spinning process and the tightly knitted stitches, produced a finish
that would "turn water" and is capable of repelling rain and spray.[4]

The guernsey was traditionally knitted by the fishermen's wives and the
pattern passed down from mother to daughter through the generations.
While commercially available sweaters are machine knit, the final
finishing of these machine-knit parts is completed by hand.[5]

Through trade links established in the 17th century, the guernsey found
favour with seafarers around the British Isles, and many coastal
communities developed their own "ganseys" based on the original pattern.
Whilst the classic guernsey pattern remained plain, the stitch patterns
used became more complex the further north the garment spread, with the
most complex evolving in the Scottish fishing villages.[6]

Mary Wright argues that the use and wearing of guernseys throughout the
British Isles for over a century and a half almost justifies the
guernsey for qualification as a national costume.[7] A guernsey from the
[Folk Museum Guernsey](Folk_Museum_Guernsey "wikilink") was included in
the 2010 BBC project [A History of the World in 100
Objects](A_History_of_the_World_in_100_Objects "wikilink").[8]

The term can also refer to a similarly-shaped garment made of woven
cloth, also called a Guernsey [shirt or smock](Smock-frock "wikilink").
There are a number of different names for the same garments, for
instance Guernsey frock, Guernsey shirt,
[smock-frock](smock-frock "wikilink"), or fisherman’s frock. Essentially
these are all the same garment, with the materials varying based on the
purpose for which it is worn.[9]

## Pattern

Two styles of guernsey exist: a plain "working" guernsey and a "finer"
example that was generally saved for special occasions and Sunday-best
attire.[10] Traditionally, Ganseys were seamless and worked in the round
using the circular knitting method.

The "working" guernsey design was kept simpler in order to reduce the
amount of time and materials needed to produce. The sale of knitted
garments to supplement family income was important to many island
families and thus the garments that were sold were also of a simple
design. It is estimated that a total of 84 hours was needed to complete
a guernsey: a simpler design could be produced faster than a more
elaborate one.[11]

The guernsey that is still produced on the island retains much of the
original design and patterns. The rib at the top of the sleeve is said
to represent a sailing ship’s rope ladder in the rigging, the raised
seam across the shoulder a rope, and the garter stitch panel waves
breaking upon the beach. As a working garment, the gussets under the arm
and at the neck are for ease of movement, as are the splits at the
hem.[12] Twenty-four principal patterns have been identified in Cornwall
alone, each one again drawing inspiration from ropes, chains, waves,
nets and sand-prints.[13]

Worn as a source of pride and often knitted by prospective wives "to
show the industrious nature of the woman he was about to marry", the
"finer" guernsey was more elaborately patterned than its working
cousin.[14] With the advent of the machine-knitted guernsey and the
decline in the knitting industry, this guernsey is a much rarer sight.

The guernsey's tightly knitted fibres and its square shape, with a
straight neck so that it could be reversed, make it a particularly hardy
item of clothing.[15] It is not uncommon for a guernsey to last several
decades and be passed down in families. Guernseys knitted for children
were knitted to be "grown into" and often came down to the knee.[16]

## Use in the British Armed Forces

The guernsey was first widely used in the rating uniform of the 19th
century [British](United_Kingdom "wikilink") [Royal
Navy](Royal_Navy "wikilink").[17][18] It is said that guernseys were
worn at the [Battle of Trafalgar](Battle_of_Trafalgar "wikilink")[19]
(although these were probably made from woollen cloth, rather than
knitted[20]). The association of the guernsey with the British Armed
Forces has continued into the 21st century. In 2006, the [British 7th
Armoured Brigade](7th_Armoured_Brigade_(United_Kingdom) "wikilink")
ordered three hundred jumpers from a company in Guernsey and these were
sent out to Iraq. Each jumper was hand-finished in a neutral colour and
had the Desert Rat insignia sewn onto the left hand sleeve.[21] Orders
for variants of the guernsey have also come from the Intelligence Corps,
the Mercian Regiment, the Tank Regiment and Gurkha Logistics where they
form part of officer uniforms.[22]

## See also

-   [Guernsey (Australian rules
    football)](Guernsey_(Australian_rules_football) "wikilink")
-   [Jersey (clothing)](Jersey_(clothing) "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Guernsey](Category:Guernsey "wikilink") [Category:British
clothing](Category:British_clothing "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:Sweaters](Category:Sweaters "wikilink") [Category:Military
uniforms](Category:Military_uniforms "wikilink") [Category:Knitted
garments](Category:Knitted_garments "wikilink") [Category:Australian
rules football
terminology](Category:Australian_rules_football_terminology "wikilink")
[Category:Woolen clothing](Category:Woolen_clothing "wikilink")

[1] Mary Wright, Cornish Guernseys & Knit-frocks, 1979, 2008 Polperro
Heritage Press

[2] [1](http://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/625587)

[3] Marr, L.J. (1982), *A History of the Bailiwick of Guernsey* Philmore
& Co. Ltd

[4] "The Story of the
Guernsey"[2](http://www.guernseyknitwear.co.uk/story.htm) accessed 6 May
2008

[5]

[6] "A Short History of the Hand-Knitted
Gansey"[3](http://www.flamboroughmanor.co.uk/pdf/FMCataloguePDF.pdf)
accessed 6 May 2008

[7] Wright, M. (1989) *Cornish Guernseys and Knit-froks*, Alison
Hodge/Ethnographica Ltd.

[8] "BBC 'A History of the
World'"[4](http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/objects/vd4cmoXrQAqCUU802CkZiQ)
accessed 23 June 2011

[9] "The Guernsey Shirt, Smock or Frock" accessed 6 July 2011

[10] Lambert, G.A. (2002) *The Taxonomy of Sweater Structures and Their
Origins*, Raleigh

[11] Pearson, M. (1984) *Traditional Knitting:Aran, Fair Isle and Fisher
Ganseys*, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15] "The History of the
Gansey"[5](http://www.manorhouse.clara.net/knitwear/history.htm)
accessed 6 May 2008

[16]

[17] "The History of Rating Uniforms" accessed 6 May 2008

[18] "Traditional Guernsey knitwear and genuine Alderney sweaters from
the Channel
Islands"[6](http://www.channeljumper.com/?gclid=CJWNtM2TkpMCFQSKMAodvlxoYQ)
accessed 6 May 2008

[19]

[20]

[21] "Desert Rats get 'knitted out' for Iraqi winter" accessed 6 May
2008

[22] "The guernsey becomes a fashion must-have"
[7](http://www.thisisguernsey.com/2010/11/04/the-guernsey-becomes-a-fashion-must-have/)
accessed 22 June 2011