![](Shirt-type_Henley.svg "fig:Shirt-type_Henley.svg") A **Henley
shirt** is a collarless pullover [shirt](shirt "wikilink"),
characterized by a [placket](placket "wikilink") below the round
neckline, about long and usually having 2–5 buttons.[1][2][3] It
essentially is a collarless [polo shirt](polo_shirt "wikilink"). The
sleeves may be either short or long, and it can be made in almost any
fabric, although [cotton](cotton "wikilink"),
cotton-[polyester](polyester "wikilink") blends, and
[thermals](Thermal_underwear "wikilink") are by far the most popular.[4]
Henley shirts are generally regarded as [menswear](menswear "wikilink"),
but women's versions have appeared as [business
casual](business_casual "wikilink") and
[casual](casual_attire "wikilink") wear as well.

## History

Henley shirts were named because they were the traditional uniform of
[rowers](Rowing_(sport) "wikilink") in the English town of
[Henley-on-Thames](Henley-on-Thames "wikilink").[5] The first [Henley
Royal Regatta](Henley_Royal_Regatta "wikilink") was in 1839.

In his biography of [Ralph Lauren](Ralph_Lauren "wikilink"), the
journalist [Michael Gross](Michael_Gross_(writer) "wikilink") quotes a
New York merchant who recalled showing a vintage shirt to a Ralph Lauren
buyer: "I showed this fellow underwear—a three-button long-sleeve shirt
by Johnstown Knitting Mills. He said, 'This is a new shirt.' That's
where he got the idea for the Henley shirt."[6]

## References

[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink") [Category:Tops
(clothing)](Category:Tops_(clothing) "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]