The is a style of dress shirt originating in [Okinawa
Prefecture](Okinawa_Prefecture "wikilink"), [Japan](Japan "wikilink").
Similar to [aloha shirts](aloha_shirt "wikilink"), these shirts are
mainly worn in summer. The shirts are printed, mostly short-sleeved, and
collared. Kariyushi shirts may be worn as casual, informal wear, or as
dresswear. First introduced in 1970 to promote tourism to Okinawa
Prefecture, the style gained popularity in 2000 when head of states wore
them during the [26th G8 summit](26th_G8_summit "wikilink") which was
held in Okinawa. These shirts are promoted as part of the [Cool Biz
campaign](Cool_Biz_campaign "wikilink") by the Government of Japan.

## History

In 1970, the Okinawa Tourism Association started selling aloha-like
shirts under the name of *Okinawa shirts* in order to promote tourism to
Okinawa Prefecture.[1] The initial campaign was unsuccessful, leaving
piles of unsold merchandize. These leftovers were worn by hotel
association members. The popularity of the shirts spread during the time
of the second [oil crisis](1979_energy_crisis "wikilink"). At first, the
shirts were limited to variations using motifs of traditional arts such
as [bingata](bingata "wikilink") or [Yaeyami
minsa](Yaeyami_minsa "wikilink"). Eventually, many individuals related
to the tourist trade such as hotel staff, travelers and tour guides
began to wear them.

The Mensōre Okinawa Kenmin Undō Suishin Kyōgikai, a newly-formed
coalition of Okinawan tourism organizations, decided to produce shirts
featuring Okinawaness and named them *kariyushi shirts* in 1990.
*Kariyushi* means "harmony" or "happiness" in
[Okinawan](Central_Okinawan_language "wikilink"). In 1997, the Okinawa
Hotel Ryokan Association started promoting another type of aloha-like
shirts named *tropical wear* as well as *tropical Friday* (Okinawan
version of [casual Friday](casual_Friday "wikilink")).[2] This resulted
in their widespread use in places such as government offices.

Year 2000 was a turning point for Kariyushi shirts. The name of the
shirts was standardized as *kariyushi shirts* (かりゆしウェア). In 2000
each [head of state](head_of_state "wikilink") wore one during the [26th
G8 summit](26th_G8_summit "wikilink") held in Okinawa. During this time,
variations in the shirt design appeared and the shirts became popular
for use among government employees, bank workers and people in the
general business sector.[3] According to the Okinawa Apparel Sewing
Industrial Association, over 310,000 shirts were sold in 2004. Okinawa
also holds a textile contest once every year, allowing contestants to
design a kariyushi shirt.

In 2005, when the "Summer casual dress" idea was introduced mainly for
the [Ministry of the
Environment](Ministry_of_the_Environment_(Japan) "wikilink") and
[Ministry of Economy, Trade and
Industry](Ministry_of_Economy,_Trade_and_Industry "wikilink"), [Yuriko
Koike](Yuriko_Koike "wikilink"), the environment minister, also took on
the responsibility of minister for Okinawa and promoted the kariyushi
shirt as part of the Cool Biz campaign. From June 1, the beginning of
the promotion period, many of the staff who worked at the [Okinawa
Development and Promotion
Bureau](Okinawa_Development_and_Promotion_Bureau "wikilink") wore the
shirts as well as the [Prime Minister of
Japan](Prime_Minister_of_Japan "wikilink") at that time, [Junichiro
Koizumi](Junichiro_Koizumi "wikilink"). Koizumi had already worn the
Kariyushi shirt at the [Japan Pacific Islands
Summit](Japan_Pacific_Islands_Summit "wikilink") in 2003 which was held
in Okinawa.

The [NHK](NHK "wikilink") Okinawa bureau asked all news reporters on the
weekday evening local news program *Haisai! Terebi Sukasu* to wear the
kariyushi shirt from June to October 2006. The show started in April
2006. NHK recognized that this contributed to the popularity of the
shirts. Even on the [TBS](Tokyo_Broadcasting_System "wikilink") network,
the main newscaster, [Tetsuya Chikushi](Tetsuya_Chikushi "wikilink"),
wore a kariyushi shirt in the summer of 2004 and 2005 on his news show
"Tetsuya Chikushi NEWS23".

In June 2009, all members of the [Japanese
government](Japanese_government "wikilink") who attended the cabinet
meeting wore a shirt as part of the Cool Biz campaign. The [Liberal
Democratic Party](Liberal_Democratic_Party_of_Japan "wikilink") also
wore the shirts, but [Hiroyuki Hosoda](Hiroyuki_Hosoda "wikilink") wore
his shirt tucked into his pants which was said to have annoyed [Yuriko
Koike](Yuriko_Koike "wikilink") throughout the entire meeting. The
kariyushi shirt is worn outside of the pants, and never tucked into the
pants.

## Design

Kariyushi shirts manufactured in Okinawa for local Okinawan residents
are usually adorned with characteristic Okinawan designs found in
traditional Okinawan arts, [shisā](shisā "wikilink") temple guardian
designs, and simple floral patterns in muted colors. They are often used
to promote tourism in Okinawa, and have been established in replacing
the standard white shirt and tie for Okinawan office workers during the
summer. In 2005, the [Cool Biz campaign](Cool_Biz_campaign "wikilink")
prompted members of the [Okinawan cabinet](Okinawan_cabinet "wikilink"),
mostly in central government, to wear the shirt during work hours.

Kariyushi shirts were created based on the Aloha shirt, generally
designed with short sleeves and an open collar. They usually have
buttons, sometimes as a complete button-down shirt, and sometimes just
down to the chest (pullover). Kariyushi shirts usually have a left chest
pocket sewn in, often with attention to ensure the printed pattern
remains continuous. The shirts are cut short so that they can hang
comfortably outside the pants. Patterns on the shirt use motifs from
scenery characteristic to Okinawa such as [bitter
melons](bitter_melon "wikilink"), [hirami
lemons](hirami_lemon "wikilink"), and Okinawan [dragon
boats](dragon_boat "wikilink").

The price of the shirts can vary from a few thousand yen for cheaper
versions to several tens of thousands of yen for high-grade shirts made
from *[musa basjoo](musa_basjoo "wikilink")* "Japanese fiber banana",
similar to Hawaiian [tapa cloth](tapa_cloth "wikilink").

Many variations of the shirt debuted from 2000. Shirts with longer
sleeves were designed for women who were concerned with
[sunburn](sunburn "wikilink"), and formal designs made from black
fabrics for ceremonial events were sold.

Currently, wearing kariyushi shirts is promoted during the period of
April to November. During this period, a large percentage of local
government personnel wear the kariyushi shirt. In September 1999, the
Okinawa parliamentary body gave permission for members to wear the shirt
inside the parliamentary chambers. Many of these members currently wear
the shirt and progress is being made for the local assembly to wear the
shirts. Post office workers and [Japan Transocean
Air](Japan_Transocean_Air "wikilink") have their own characteristic
shirt which they wear in the summer as part of their uniform. Even
members at branch offices belonging to Okinawan companies located
outside of Okinawa wear the shirt on "casual Friday".

## Branding

The term "Kariyushi shirt" was a registered trademark of Okinawa
Industrial Federation but the right was transferred to the Okinawa
Apparel Sewing Industrial Association.[4] The rules of the authorization
are as follows:

1.  The shirts must be manufactured within the prefecture of Okinawa
    (fabric produced outside of the prefecture can be used to make the
    shirts).
2.  Only patterns that promote tourism in Okinawa can be used.

## References

<references/>
[Category:Japanese fashion](Category:Japanese_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink") [Category:Textile arts of
Japan](Category:Textile_arts_of_Japan "wikilink") [Category:History of
fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]