![](Kosovorotkamuz.jpg "Kosovorotkamuz.jpg")

A **kosovorotka** (), commonly known in the West as a **Zhivago shirt,**
**Russian** **peasant shirt** or **Tolstoy shirt,** is a
[Russian](Russia "wikilink"), skewed-collared [shirt](shirt "wikilink").
The word is derived from *koso* - skewed, and *vorot* collar.

## Description

<img src="Ivan_Bilibin_036.jpeg" title="fig: Ivashka in a Kosovorotka and Baba Yaga from the fairy tale about three Tsar virgins and about Ivaschka, the priest&#39;s son. Ivan Bilibin, 1911" width="220" height="220" alt=" Ivashka in a Kosovorotka and Baba Yaga from the fairy tale about three Tsar virgins and about Ivaschka, the priest&#39;s son. Ivan Bilibin, 1911" />
A *kosovorotka* is a traditional Russian shirt, long sleeved and
reaching down to the mid-thigh. The shirt is not buttoned all the way
down to the hem, but has several buttons at the collar (unfastened when
the garment is pulled over the wearer's head), though these are
positioned off to one side (regional styles vary between left and
right), instead of centrally, as is customary with a typical Western
20th and 21st century man's shirt. If left unbuttoned the collar appears
skewed, which accounts for the garment's name. The collar and sleeves of
kosovorotka were often decorated with a traditional Slavic ornament.[1]

The overwhelming majority of Russians were peasants, who often worked
bending down towards the ground. Almost all of them wore a Christian
cross, which was considered strictly an underclothing sign. The skewed
collar of the shirt was designed so to prevent the cross from falling
out from under the shirt. This limited annoyance and allowed for the
peasant to be more
productive.![](Torama_REM_30.05.2009.jpg "fig:Torama_REM_30.05.2009.jpg")
in [St. Petersburg](Saint_Petersburg "wikilink") carries
Kosovorotkas\]\]

The men's garment was worn loose and was not tucked into the trousers,
but instead belted either with a conventional belt, a rope, or a
rope-like tie. The tails of the garment hung over the trousers. Women's
shirts were tucked into the skirt or worn under the
[sarafan](sarafan "wikilink"), and the button line of women's shirts
tended to be in the middle, rather than off at the side. Children's
shirts were often too long for those who wore them, and was the only
piece of clothing on little boys and girls in the ancient
times.![](Ganf-kosovorotka.jpg "fig:Ganf-kosovorotka.jpg") Generally
associated with Russian peasants, the *kosovorotka* was worn by peasants
and townsmen of various social categories into the early 20th century,
when it was rapidly displaced as an everyday garment by more efficient
and less elaborate clothing after the [Bolshevik
Revolution](Bolshevik_Revolution "wikilink") of 1917. The garment is
also known as a *tolstovka*, or the Tolstoy-shirt, because the writer
[Leo Tolstoy](Leo_Tolstoy "wikilink") customarily wore one in his later
years. Since the late 20th century *kosovorotkas* appear mostly as
souvenirs and as scenic garments of Russian [folk music, song and
dance](folk_art "wikilink") ensembles. The *kosovorotka* is also seen
worn by [Omar Sharif](Omar_Sharif "wikilink") as Yuri Zhivago in [David
Lean](David_Lean "wikilink")'s 1965 film *[Doctor
Zhivago](Doctor_Zhivago_(film) "wikilink")*.

## See also

-   [Vyshyvanka](Vyshyvanka "wikilink")
-   [Lenin hat](Lenin_hat "wikilink")
-   [Lapti](Lapti "wikilink")
-   [Valenki](Valenki "wikilink")

## References

## External links

[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Russian
culture](Category:Russian_culture "wikilink") [Category:Russian
inventions](Category:Russian_inventions "wikilink") [Category:Russian
folk clothing](Category:Russian_folk_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink")

[1]