---
title: Madiba shirt
permalink: /Madiba_shirt/
---

[thumb\|[Nelson Mandela](Nelson_Mandela "wikilink") in 1998, wearing a
Madiba shirt](/File:Nelson_Mandela_1998.JPG "wikilink")

A **Madiba shirt** is a loose-fitting [silk](/silk "wikilink") shirt,
usually adorned in a bright and colourful print. It became known in the
1990s, when [Nelson Mandela](/Nelson_Mandela "wikilink")—then elected
[President of South Africa](/President_of_South_Africa "wikilink")—added
the item to his regular attire. Mandela popularised this type of shirt,
elevating the seemingly casual garment to formal situations.

## Design

A form of [casual wear](/casual_wear "wikilink"), Madiba shirts are
loose-fitting, usually worn without a [necktie](/necktie "wikilink") and
untucked from [trousers](/trousers "wikilink"). It is very similar to
Indonesian [batik](/batik "wikilink") clothing and generally made of
cotton or silk patterned with vivid colours. Mandela was said to prefer
earthier tones for the shirt, though Madiba shirts with bright colors
have endured in popularity.

## History

There are many who claim the Madiba shirt's invention. Yusuf Surtee, a
clothing-store owner who supplied Mandela with outfits for decades, said
the Madiba design is based on Mandela's request for a shirt like
Indonesian president [Suharto](/Suharto "wikilink")'s. Fashion designer
Desré Buirski presented this type of shirt (and her contact information)
to Mandela as a gift on 7 May 1994 by getting it to a bodyguard during a
visit to a Cape Town synagogue; Mandela wore the shirt to the dress
rehearsal for his presidential inauguration. Sonwabile Ndamase said he
"was the first to do it" in 1990.

Mandela regularly wore this type of shirt, which became known as "Madiba
shirts" after Mandela's [Xhosa clan name](/Xhosa_clan_names "wikilink").
The affectionate name became linked to the shirts when Mandela wore them
to many business and political meetings during (1994–99) and after his
tenure as [President of South
Africa](/President_of_South_Africa "wikilink").

## Legacy

Within the clothing industry, Mandela's willingness to wear the casual
attire—he eventually owned dozens of the shirts—marked a new style of
international business dress. In a broader sense, the fashion choice can
be read as a signal of "friendly" regime change away from strict
formality and toward greater acceptance. It can also be argued that,
throughout his life, Mandela's fashion was a significant part of his
public image: in the 1950s, he dressed in sophisticated clothes; during
the [Rivonia Trial](/Rivonia_Trial "wikilink") in 1963–64, he brought
out Xhosa traditions with a leopard-skin [kaross](/kaross "wikilink");
and after his release from prison, he wore the colourful Madiba shirt
often. In 2013, art historian Lize van Robbroeck wrote:

Madiba shirts (and variants) are popular among tourists to South Africa,
South African sportspeople, and Tanzanian men (possibly as a sign of
general African solidarity or reflecting Africa's supposedly more
laid-back dress than Europe).

## References

## Bibliography

-

-

-

-

-

-

[Category:South African
fashion](/Category:South_African_fashion "wikilink") [Category:African
clothing](/Category:African_clothing "wikilink") [Category:South African
English](/Category:South_African_English "wikilink") [Category:Nelson
Mandela](/Category:Nelson_Mandela "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](/Category:Shirts "wikilink")