![](Polo_Shirt_Basic_Pattern.png "fig:Polo_Shirt_Basic_Pattern.png") A
**polo shirt** is a form of shirt with a collar, a placket neckline with
typically two or three buttons, and an optional pocket. Polo shirts are
usually short sleeved; they were originally used by [polo
players](Polo#Players "wikilink") during the 1920s[1]

Polo shirts are usually made of [knitted](knitted_fabric "wikilink")
[cotton](cotton "wikilink") (rather than [woven](woven "wikilink")
cloth), usually a [Piqué](Piqué_(weaving) "wikilink") knit, or less
commonly an [interlock](Jersey_(fabric) "wikilink") knit (the latter
used frequently, though not exclusively, with [pima
cotton](Gossypium_barbadense "wikilink") polos), or using other fibers
such as [silk](silk "wikilink"), [merino](merino "wikilink")
[wool](wool "wikilink"), [synthetic fibers](synthetic_fiber "wikilink"),
or blends of natural and synthetic fibers. A
[dress](dress "wikilink")-length version of the shirt is called a **polo
dress**.[2]

## History

### History of the polo shirt

At the end of the 19th century, outdoor activities became important for
the British ruling class. [Jodhpur pants](Jodhpur_pants "wikilink") and
polo shirts became part of the wardrobe for horse-related sports.[3] The
two garments were brought back from India by the British, along with the
game of polo. A picture shot at the end of the 19th century, presumably
in India, shows players wearing a striped polo shirt.[4]

### History of the tennis shirt

![](Tennis-shirt-lacoste.jpg "fig:Tennis-shirt-lacoste.jpg") tennis
shirt\]\] In the 19th and early 20th centuries,
[tennis](tennis "wikilink") players ordinarily wore "tennis whites"
consisting of long-sleeved white button-up shirts (worn with the sleeves
rolled up), flannel [trousers](trousers "wikilink"), and
[ties](necktie "wikilink").[5][6][7] This attire presented problems for
ease of play and comfort.[8]

[René Lacoste](René_Lacoste "wikilink"), the [French](France "wikilink")
seven-time [Grand Slam](Grand_Slam_(tennis) "wikilink") tennis champion,
felt that the stiff tennis attire was too cumbersome and
uncomfortable.[9] He designed a white, short-sleeved, loosely-knit
[piqué](Piqué_(weaving) "wikilink") cotton (he called the cotton weave
*jersey petit piqué*) shirt with an unstarched, flat, protruding collar,
a buttoned placket, and a shirt-tail longer in back than in front (known
today as a "tennis tail"; see below), which he first wore at the 1926
U.S. Open championship.[10][11][12][13]

Beginning in 1927, Lacoste placed a crocodile emblem on the left breast
of his shirts, as the American press had begun to refer to him as "The
Crocodile",[14][15] a nickname which he embraced.[16][17][18]

Lacoste's design mitigated the problems that traditional tennis attire
created:[19][20][21][22]

-   the short, cuffed sleeves solved the tendency of long sleeves to
    roll down
-   the soft collar could be loosened easily by unbuttoning the placket
-   the piqué [collar](collar_(clothing) "wikilink") could be worn
    [upturned](upturned_collar "wikilink") to protect the
    [neck](neck "wikilink") skin from the [sun](sun "wikilink")
-   the jersey knit piqué cotton breathed and was more durable
-   the "tennis tail" prevented the shirt from pulling out of the
    wearer's trousers or shorts

In 1933, after retiring from professional tennis, Lacoste teamed up with
[André Gillier](André_Gillier "wikilink"), a friend who was a clothing
merchandiser, to market that shirt in Europe and North
America.[23][24][25] Together, they formed the company [Chemise
Lacoste](Lacoste "wikilink"), and began selling their shirts, which
included the small embroidered crocodile logo on the left
breast.[26][27]

### Application to polo

![](Chakravarty_Cup_2008.jpg "fig:Chakravarty_Cup_2008.jpg"), [Adolfo
Cambiaso](Adolfo_Cambiaso "wikilink"), [Martin
Valent](Martin_Valent "wikilink") with fellow player [Prince
William](Prince_William "wikilink") (center), wearing polo shirts as
part of their uniform.\]\] Until the beginning of 20th century
[polo](polo "wikilink") players wore thick long-sleeve shirts made of
[Oxford-cloth](Oxford_(cloth) "wikilink") cotton.[28] This shirt was the
first to have a buttoned-down collar, which polo players invented in the
late 19th century to keep their collars from flapping in the wind
([Brooks Brothers](Brooks_Brothers "wikilink")' early president, John
Brooks, noticed this while at a polo match in England and began
producing such a shirt in 1896).[29][30]

Brooks Brothers still produces this style of button-down "polo
shirt".[31] Still, like early tennis clothing, those clothes presented a
discomfort on the field.

In 1920, Lewis Lacey, a Canadian (born of English parents in Montreal,
Quebec in 1887) [haberdasher](Haberdashery "wikilink") and polo player,
began producing a shirt that was embroidered with an emblem of a polo
player, a design originating at the [Hurlingham Polo
Club](Hurlingham_Club_(Argentina) "wikilink") near Buenos Aires.[32] The
definition of the uniform of polo players – the polo shirt and a pair of
white trousers – is actually a fairly recent addition to the sport.
Until the 1940s shirts were generally very plain, with no numbers,
writing or logos. When necessary, numbers (ranging from 1 – 4) were
simply pinned on to the back of the player's shirts a few minutes before
the start of a match. To differentiate the polo teams from one another,
some polo shirts had horizontal stripes, others bore diagonal coloured
stripes.

In 1972, [Ralph Lauren](Ralph_Lauren "wikilink") included his "polo
shirt" as a prominent part of his original line
[Polo](Polo_Ralph_Lauren "wikilink"), thereby helping further its
already widespread popularity.[33] While not specifically designed for
use by polo players, Lauren's shirt imitated what by that time had
become the normal attire for polo players. As he desired to exude a
certain "[WASPishness](White_Anglo-Saxon_Protestant "wikilink")" in his
clothes, initially adopting the style of clothiers like Brooks Brothers,
[J. Press](J._Press "wikilink"), and "[Savile
Row](Savile_Row "wikilink")"-style English clothing, he prominently
included this attire from the "sport of kings" in his line, replete with
a logo reminiscent of Lacoste's [crocodile](crocodile "wikilink")
[emblem](emblem "wikilink"), depicting a polo player and pony.

### Golf

Over the latter half of the 20th century, as standard clothing in
[golf](golf "wikilink") became more casual, the tennis shirt was adopted
nearly universally as standard golf attire.[34] Many golf courses and
country clubs require players to wear golf shirts as a part of their
[dress code](dress_code "wikilink").[35][36] Moreover, producing
Lacoste's "tennis shirt" in various golf cuts has resulted in specific
designs of the tennis shirt for golf, resulting in the moniker *golf
shirt*.

Golf shirts are commonly made out of [polyester](polyester "wikilink"),
cotton-polyester blends, or mercerized cotton. The placket typically
holds three or four buttons, and consequently extends lower than the
typical polo neckline. The collar is typically fabricated using a
stitched double-layer of the same fabric used to make the shirt, in
contrast to a polo shirt collar, which is usually one-ply ribbed knit
cotton. Golf shirts often have a pocket on the left side, to hold a
scorepad and pencil, and may not bear a logo there.

## See also

-   [Rugby shirt](Rugby_shirt "wikilink")
-   [Sportswear (activewear)](Sportswear_(activewear) "wikilink")

## References

[Category:1926 clothes](Category:1926_clothes "wikilink")
[Category:1920s fashion](Category:1920s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1930s fashion](Category:1930s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1970s fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1980s fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1990s fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2000s fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink") [Category:Tennis
equipment](Category:Tennis_equipment "wikilink") [Category:Tops
(clothing)](Category:Tops_(clothing) "wikilink") [Category:French
inventions](Category:French_inventions "wikilink")

[1] Charlotte Mankey Calasibetta – Phyllis Tortora, The Fairchild
Dictionary of Fashion – 2003 Fairchild Publications, inc. New York –

[2]

[3] Vittoria De Buzzaccarini, L'eleganza dello stile – Duecent'anni di
vestir maschile. 1992, Edizioni Lupetti & co

[4] <https://www.hurlinghampolo1875.com/our-story>

[5]

[6] The Story of Lacoste. Retrieved from .

[7] Style & Design: Lacoste. *Time* Magazine, Winter 2004. Retrieved
from
<http://www.time.com/time/2004/style/111504/article/lacoste_on_a_lark_and_a08a.html>.

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13] [*The Brand Channel*, Lacoste
profile](http://www.brandchannel.com/features_profile.asp?pr_id=300) .

[14] [1](http://www.chansons-net.com/tennis/champions/lacoste/E-lacoste.html)*The
Crocodile*

[15] [2](http://www.lacoste.com/#/rene_lacoste-rub-1)*The Birth of the
Crocodile*

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30] [*Fashion Encyclopedia*, "Brooks
Brothers"](http://www.fashionencyclopedia.com/Bo-Ch/Brooks-Brothers.html).

[31]

[32]

[33] [Official Ralph Lauren history website:
"1972"](http://about.ralphlauren.com/history/history.asp?year=1972).

[34]

[35] ["Dress
Code"](http://www.burleighgolfclub.com.au/guests/golf/dress.mhtml),
BURLEIGH HEADS GOLF CLUB

[36] ["Dress Code: Proper Golf
Attire"](http://www.golflongislandnational.com/Club_Rules___Regulations.html),
Long Island National Golf Club