The phrase **Shirt of Flame** refers either to a specific form of the
[poison dress](poison_dress "wikilink") trope in folklore, or to a
particular type of clothing given to people about to face [burning at
the stake](burning_at_the_stake "wikilink").

## Pre-Christian usage

[Creusa (daughter of Creon)](Creusa_(daughter_of_Creon) "wikilink") drew
the attentions and favor of the hero [Jason](Jason "wikilink"), and in
revenge the sorceress [Medea](Medea "wikilink") gave her a shirt or
dress to wear, which Medea had cursed to stick to her body and burn her
to death. This is an example of the folklore trope of the [poison
dress](poison_dress "wikilink").

> They \[Jason and Medea\] went to Corinth, and lived there happily for
> ten years, till Creon, king of Corinth, betrothed his daughter
> [Glauce](Glauce "wikilink") to Jason, who married her and divorced
> Medea. But she invoked the gods by whom Jason had sworn, and after
> often upbraiding him with his ingratitude she sent the bride a robe
> steeped in poison, which when Glauce had put on, she was consumed with
> fierce fire along with her father, who went to her rescue.[1]

## Roman martyrs

![400 px](Siemiradski_Fackeln.jpg "fig:400 px"). According to Tacitus,
Nero used Christians as human torches\]\] During the [Persecution of
Christians in the Roman
Empire](Persecution_of_Christians_in_the_Roman_Empire "wikilink"), many
early Christians were executed by being doused with tar, pitch and oil,
and set alight in Rome. According to [Tacitus](Tacitus "wikilink"), the
Roman Emperor [Nero](Nero "wikilink") used Christians as human torches.
As such, they martyrs wore the metaphorical "Shirt of Flame" as they
were consumed. Often they were stripped and forced to wear a [Tunica
molesta](Tunica_molesta "wikilink") or "annoying shirt" that was
impregnated with oil, that was also a "Shirt of Flame". "The tunica
molesta, or flaming shirt, was commonly used to execute criminals in
ancient Greece and Rome."[2]

## Roman Catholic

In Roman Catholic countries such as France, Italy and Spain, heretics
after their trial were confined until the execution. The shirt of flame
in the [auto-da-fe](auto-da-fe "wikilink") under the
[Inquisition](Inquisition "wikilink") also was worn at different times
through the centuries. Often the outfit for those to be burned were
funny hats, and a shirt or [tabard](tabard "wikilink") with flames, and
sometimes imps and demons, sewn upon them. These images were used to
terrify the convicted heretics, as well to subject them to ridicule and
abuse as they were paraded to the place of execution.
![](Pedro_Berruguete_Saint_Dominic_Presiding_over_an_Auto-da-fe_1495.jpg "fig:Pedro_Berruguete_Saint_Dominic_Presiding_over_an_Auto-da-fe_1495.jpg")
In Spain, special clothing such as the [sanbenito](sanbenito "wikilink")
was worn as part of their penance. Often made of yellow or faded
sackcloth, these shirts used special symbols, including the [Cross of
Saint Andrew](Saltire "wikilink"), for the convicted. The humiliation of
the shirt of flame outfit was part of the punishment, and also was used
to warn others of the penalties of nonconformity in faith, speech and
practice. Heretics were often people who did not conform to church
teachings or doctrine. Many of them remained Catholic in most of their
beliefs, but felt that they had betrayed that church or strayed from the
church's teachings. Unlike areas with larger Protestant communities, the
heretics were shamed and humiliated, rather than seeing themselves as
martyrs to the Protestant religion. The shirt of flame worn by these men
and women was never a gown of pride or sacrifice, but of despair.

## Biblical references

The white gown or Shirt of Flame used by Protestant martyrs was modeled
in part on the long white garments worn by the martyrs "of the great
tribulation" in heaven, as mentioned in chapter seven of the Bible's
[Book of Revelation](Book_of_Revelation "wikilink"). "9 After this I
beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all
nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands... 13 And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are
these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they? 14 And I
said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and
made them white in the blood of the Lamb."[3]

## Protestant martyrs in England

Under the *[De heretico comburendo](De_heretico_comburendo "wikilink")*
of 1401, heretics in England would be executed by burning at the stake.
Many Protestants were later sentenced to "[death by
burning](death_by_burning "wikilink")" in 16th-century England because
of their faith. A number of them were ministers to small congregations,
who were arrested and tried for heresy. Sometimes, they were given a
special "Shirt of Flame" to wear under their clothes. Then, just before
their execution, they were stripped to their underclothes, which would
be this special shirt.
![](Maidstone_martyrs_plaque.JPG "fig:Maidstone_martyrs_plaque.JPG")
When he was sentenced to death by burning, [John
Bradford](John_Bradford "wikilink") was give a special shirt by a Mrs.
Marlet, for whom he had previously written a devotional work. This was a
clean shirt that was sewn specifically for the burning, made in the
style of a wedding shirt. "This clothing with a new shirt to wear at the
stake became a common feature at the burnings, a way of signaling
support for and honouring the victim, as though he were being dressed as
a bridegroom for a wedding." Also, the ceremonial donning of the shirt
of flame could be seen as similar to the priest donning his vestments,
thus subverting Catholic ritual. "...and so the martyr might pray over
and kiss the shirt before putting it on... underlining their oneness
with Christ and the fact they were willing to die..."[4]

## In popular culture

[Oscar Wilde](Oscar_Wilde "wikilink"), in his letter "[De
Profundis](De_Profundis_(letter) "wikilink")," written from prison,
writes: "The martyr in his shirt of flame may be looking on the face of
God, but to him who is piling the faggots or loosening the logs for the
blast the whole scene is no more than the slaying of an ox is to the
butcher, or the felling of a tree is to the charcoal burner in the
forest, or the fall of a flower to one who is mowing down the grass with
a scythe."

[T. S. Eliot](T._S._Eliot "wikilink"), after his conversion to
Anglicanism, wrote in "[Little
Gidding](Little_Gidding_(poem) "wikilink")" (one of his *[Four
Quartets](Four_Quartets "wikilink")*): "Love is the unfamiliar Name /
Behind the hands that wove / The intolerable shirt of flame / Which
human power cannot remove."[5]

## References

<references>

[6] [7] [8] [9] [10]

</references>

[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink") [Category:People executed
by the Kingdom of England by
burning](Category:People_executed_by_the_Kingdom_of_England_by_burning "wikilink")
[Category:Protestant martyrs of
England](Category:Protestant_martyrs_of_England "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] Mayor, Adrienne. 1997. ["Firey
Finery"](https://archive.archaeology.org/9703/abstracts/fiery.html).
Archaeology. Volume 50, (2), March/April 1997.

[9] [Book of Revelation](Book_of_Revelation "wikilink") 7:9â€“14.

[10] Rounding, Virginia. [The Burning Time: Henry VIII, Bloody Mary, and
the Protestant Martyrs of
London](http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/967077639). 2017. Page 287.