---
title: Tube top
permalink: /Tube_top/
---

[upright\|thumb\|A white tube
top](/File:Woman_visitor_at_Kuala_Lumpur_Bird_Park,_Malaysia-10Aug2010.jpg "wikilink")
A **tube top**, colloquially known in the UK as a **boob tube**,[1] is a
[shoulderless](/shoulder "wikilink"), [sleeveless](/sleeve "wikilink")
women's garment that wraps around the upper [torso](/torso "wikilink").
It is generally tight over the [breasts](/breast "wikilink"), and
usually uses elastic bands at its top and bottom to prevent it from
falling. The tube top's precursor was a beachwear or informal summer
garment worn by young girls in the 1950s that became more widely popular
in the 1970s and returned to popularity in the 1990s and 2000s.[2]

In 2012 Iranian-Israeli fashion designer [Elie
Tahari](/Elie_Tahari "wikilink") claimed that he helped popularize tube
top after his arrival in New York in 1971.[3] The original tube tops, as
spotted by Tahari in a New York factory run by Murray Kleid, were
elasticated gauze tubes reportedly produced through a factory
manufacturing error. Murray ran with this product for years, and
eventually Tahari bought tubes from Kleid, later setting up his own
factory to mass produce tube tops to meet widespread demand.[4]

## Dress code controversies

[thumb\|150px\|A young woman in a tube
top.](/File:YoungWomanInTubeTop.jpg "wikilink") In the 2010s, tube tops
have been banned by some schools (e.g., one New Jersey school's dress
code bans tube tops as "too 'distracting' for the eighth grade
boys").[5] In 2018, opponents of these types of clothing bans argued
that they are a "form of \[body-\]shaming" on women and should not be
used; in one San Francisco Bay area school district, based on advice
from the [National Organization for
Women](/National_Organization_for_Women "wikilink"), tube tops (along
with miniskirts and other formerly disallowed items) are being permitted
again.[6] A law review article on student dress codes states that codes
that disallow young women from wearing tube tops, but which would permit
a young man to wear a tube top, are potentially sexist and
discriminatory, since the gendered nature of the prohibition undermines
the claim that the rule is designed for "preventing distraction and
disruption" in class.[7] In 2015, tube tops were among the items banned
at a major trade show/conference association, due to concerns that this
clothing unduly sexualized the women.[8]

## See also

-   [Bandeau](/Bandeau "wikilink")
-   [Strapless dress](/Strapless_dress "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-

[Category:1970s fashion](/Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1980s fashion](/Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1990s fashion](/Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2000s fashion](/Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2010s fashion](/Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1970s fads and
trends](/Category:1970s_fads_and_trends "wikilink") [Category:History of
fashion](/Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Tops
(clothing)](/Category:Tops_(clothing) "wikilink")
[Category:Undergarments](/Category:Undergarments "wikilink")

[1] "Boob tube": a redesignation of a dismissive 1960s
[sobriquet](/sobriquet "wikilink") for
[television](/television "wikilink"), or "idiot box"; "boobs" derives
from "bubbies" ([The Straight Dope: "The Origin of 'Booby
Trap{{'"}}](http://www.straightdope.com/columns/read/2038/whats-the-origin-of-booby-trap));
the screen was a [cathode ray tube](/cathode_ray_tube "wikilink").

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7] Ariel G. Siner, Comment, Dressing to Impress? A Legal Examination of
Dress Codes in Public Schools, 57 Santa Clara L. Rev. 259 (2017). p.
227.

[8]