![](Girl_from_Podolye_by_V.Tropinin_(b._1821,_Kursk).jpg "fig:Girl_from_Podolye_by_V.Tropinin_(b._1821,_Kursk).jpg")
![](Волоська_вишиванка.jpg "fig:Волоська_вишиванка.jpg") **Vyshyvanka**
( or [1]) is a [colloquial name](colloquial_name "wikilink") for the
embroidered shirt in Ukrainian[2][3][4] and Belarusian[5][6][7]
[national costumes](national_costume "wikilink"). Ukrainian vyshyvanka
is distinguished by local embroidery features specific to [Ukrainian
embroidery](Ukrainian_embroidery "wikilink").[8]

## Etymology

In English translations of Ukrainian texts, the word "vyshyvanka" is a
[loanword](loanword "wikilink").[9] It is an example of some articles of
clothing or footware being [culturally biased](Cultural_bias "wikilink")
lexicon, similarly to the Scottish [kilt](kilt "wikilink"),
[tartan](tartan "wikilink"), or the American Indians'
[moccasins](moccasins "wikilink"), which influences the translation
choices.[10]

The term originated from the word "vyshyvka" meaning "stitch patterns".

## In Ukraine

### Embroidery

The embroi­dery is a fundamental element of the Ukrainian folk costume.
Ukrainian vyshyvanka is distinguished by local embroidery features
specific to Ukrainian embroidery:

In Ukrainian em­broidery, black, red, and white colours are basic, and
yellow, blue, and green are supplementary.

On the territory of Ukraine, embroidery existed already in the 5th
century B.C, and was a creation of [Scythian fine
art](Scythian_art "wikilink"). Ukraine is famous throughout the world
for its highly artistic embroidery. It is important for the embroiderer
today to use folk art as a source without altering stitches or colours
because every change devalues a piece of embroidery and distorts it.[11]

### Artistic Influence

#### Other national dresses

Southern Russian dress, which shows a propensity for bright,
polychromatic garments, was most certainly affected by the influence of
vividly coloured Ukrainian costume from the significant influx of
Ukrainian settlers since the 17th century.[12]

#### High fashion

During [Paris Fashion Week](Paris_Fashion_Week "wikilink") 2015,
Ukrainian fashion designer Vita Kin was featured in
*[Vogue](Vogue_(magazine) "wikilink")* magazine[13] and *[Harper's
Bazaar](Harper's_Bazaar "wikilink")* for introducing vyshyvankas as
modern [Bohemian style](Bohemian_style "wikilink") designs[14] that
attracted fashion icons like [Anna Dello
Russo](Anna_Dello_Russo "wikilink"), [Miroslava
Duma](Miroslava_Duma "wikilink"), and [Leandra
Medine](Leandra_Medine "wikilink").[15]

In its US May issue *Vogue* wrote that the vyshyvanka has "made waves
far past the Eastern European country".[16] The *[Times of
London](Times_of_London "wikilink")* declared it "this summer's \[2016\]
most sought-after item of clothing", soon following was the *[New York
Times](New_York_Times "wikilink")* who advised readers to stock up on
this "top of summer" fashion.[17] French actress [Melanie
Thierry](Melanie_Thierry "wikilink") wore a vyshyvanka at the [2016
Cannes Film Festival](2016_Cannes_Film_Festival "wikilink").[18] [Queen
Máxima of the Netherlands](Queen_Máxima_of_the_Netherlands "wikilink")
wore a vyshyvanka dress when visiting the [2016 Summer
Olympics](2016_Summer_Olympics "wikilink").[19]

### Meaning

#### Traditional beliefs

Vyshyvanka is used as a [talisman](talisman "wikilink") to protect the
person wearing it and to tell a story.[20] A geometric pattern weaved in
the past by adding red or black threads into the light threads, which
was later imitated by embroidery, was believed having the power to
protect a person from all harm.

#### Patriotism

![](Vyshyvanyi_01.jpg "fig:Vyshyvanyi_01.jpg") [Archduke Wilhelm of
Austria](Archduke_Wilhelm_of_Austria "wikilink") was a Ukrainian patriot
who preferred wearing the vyshyvanka and was therefore known in
Ukrainian as Vasyl Vyshyvanyi (Basil the Embroidered). The Vyshyvanoho
Square was named in his honour in the city of [Lviv](Lviv "wikilink").

Vyshyvanka and other national symbols became extremely popular in
Ukraine following [Euromaidan](Euromaidan "wikilink"), including in
[LGBT+](LGBT#Variants "wikilink") communities signalling their belonging
to the nation.[21]

#### Celebration

Vyshyvanka Day originated in 2006 at [Chernivtsi National
University](University_of_Chernivtsi "wikilink") by its student Lesya
Voronyuk and gradually became international as the International Day of
Vyshyvanka.[22][23] It is celebrated on the third Thursday of
May.[24][25] It is intended to unite all Ukrainians over the world,
regardless of religion, language they speak or their place of
residence.[26] It is a flash mob holiday, which is not attached to any
public holiday or feast day.[27] On this day many Ukrainians wear
vyshyvankas to demonstrate adherence to the idea of national identity
and unity and to show their patriotism. Officials, including municipal,
court, and the government officials and the head of the state,[28] may
take part in celebration.

In 2018, the Appeal Instance of the Ministry of Economic Development and
Trade of Ukraine conducted a research and came to the following
conclusions:[29]

## In Belarus

### Celebration

## Gallery

### Ukrainian Vyshyvanka

## See also

-   [Ukrainian wreath](Ukrainian_wreath "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Ukrainian
traditions](Category:Ukrainian_traditions "wikilink")
[Category:Embroidery](Category:Embroidery "wikilink")
[Category:Ukrainian folk
clothing](Category:Ukrainian_folk_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Folk
costumes](Category:Folk_costumes "wikilink")
[Category:Shirts](Category:Shirts "wikilink") [Category:Ukrainian
clothing](Category:Ukrainian_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Belarusian
clothing](Category:Belarusian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Handicrafts](Category:Handicrafts "wikilink")
[Category:Ukrainian design](Category:Ukrainian_design "wikilink")
[Category:Textile arts of
Ukraine](Category:Textile_arts_of_Ukraine "wikilink") [Category:National
symbols of Ukraine](Category:National_symbols_of_Ukraine "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17] [Vyshyvanka: Ukraine's national costume conquers the
catwalk](https://www.yahoo.com/news/vyshyvanka-ukraines-national-costume-conquers-catwalk-144536654.html),
[Yahoo! News](Yahoo!_News "wikilink") (23 August 2016)

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]