![](AmishFamilyNiagaraFalls.jpg "fig:AmishFamilyNiagaraFalls.jpg")
family in traditional plain dress clothing\]\]

**Plain dress** is a practice among some religious groups, primarily
some [Christian](Christianity "wikilink") churches in which people dress
in clothes of traditional modest design, sturdy fabric, and conservative
cut. It is intended to show acceptance of traditional gender roles,
humility, readiness to work and serve, and to preserve communal identity
and separation from the immodest, ever-changing fashions of the world.

## Practicing groups

The practice is generally found among the following
[Anabaptist](Anabaptists "wikilink") branches: [Amish](Amish "wikilink")
(Old Order Amish, [New Order Amish](New_Order_Amish "wikilink"),
[Kauffman Amish Mennonites](Kauffman_Amish_Mennonite "wikilink"),
[Beachy Amish Mennonites](Beachy_Amish "wikilink")),
[Para-Amish](Subgroups_of_Amish#Para-Amish_groups "wikilink")
([Believers in Christ](Believers_in_Christ,_Lobelville "wikilink"),
[Vernon Community](Vernon_Community,_Hestand "wikilink"), [Caneyville
Christian Community](Caneyville_Christian_Community "wikilink")),
[Mennonites](Mennonite "wikilink") ([Old Order
Mennonites](Old_Order_Mennonite "wikilink"), [Conservative
Mennonites](Conservative_Mennonites "wikilink"), traditional ["Russian"
Mennonites](Russian_Mennonite "wikilink")),
[Hutterites](Hutterite "wikilink"), the [Bruderhof
Communities](Bruderhof_Communities "wikilink"), and
[Brethren](Schwarzenau_Brethren "wikilink") ([Old Order River
Brethren](Old_Order_River_Brethren "wikilink"), [Old
Brethren](Old_Brethren "wikilink"), [Old German Baptist Brethren- New
Conference](Old_German_Baptist_Brethren-_New_Conference "wikilink"),
[Dunkard Brethren](Dunkard_Brethren "wikilink"))[1]. Plain dress is also
practiced by [Conservative Friends](Conservative_Friends "wikilink") and
[Holiness Friends](Central_Yearly_Meeting_of_Friends "wikilink")
(Quakers), in which it is part of their [testimony of
simplicity](testimony_of_simplicity "wikilink"),[2] as well as
[Cooperites](Cooperites "wikilink") (Gloriavale Christian Community) and
[fundamentalist Mormon](Mormon_fundamentalism "wikilink")
subgroups.[3][4]

Among the Amish and other plain groups, plain dress is not considered to
be a costume but instead is an expression of their religious
philosophy.[5] Plain, simple and serviceable gender identifying dress is
governed by an unwritten code of conduct, called
"[ordnung](ordnung "wikilink")" among Anabaptists, which is strictly
adhered to by Amish, Old Order Mennonites and conservative Brethren.[6]

Many [Apostolic Lutherans](Laestadian_Lutheran "wikilink") also wear
plain dress.[7]

Historically, [Methodists](Methodist "wikilink") were known for wearing
plain dress, a tradition carried on by a few members in the
[conservative holiness
movement](conservative_holiness_movement "wikilink"), such as
communicants of the [Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist
Connection](Allegheny_Wesleyan_Methodist_Connection "wikilink") and
[Evangelical Wesleyan
Church](Evangelical_Wesleyan_Church "wikilink"),[8][9] as well as some
[Pentecostal](Pentecostal "wikilink") denominations in the
[Wesleyan-Arminian](Wesleyan-Arminian "wikilink") tradition.[10]

Members of the [Moravian Church](Moravian_Church "wikilink")
traditionally wore plain dress.[11]

Traditional [Adventists](Adventists "wikilink") wear plain dress as
taught by the founder of that faith [Ellen
White](Ellen_White "wikilink") who asked that they "adopt a simple,
unadorned dress of modest length".[12] Adherents of the [Seventh-day
Adventist Church](Seventh-day_Adventist_Church "wikilink") have
historically not worn wedding rings.[13]

Other groups adhering to a conservative dress code include [Buddhist and
Christian monks](Religious_habit "wikilink"), [Orthodox
Jews](Jewish_religious_clothing "wikilink"), [Muslim
women](Islam_and_clothing "wikilink"), but these forms of dress normally
are not called "plain dress".

## Practices

Plain dress is attributed to reasons of [theology](theology "wikilink")
and [sociology](sociology "wikilink").[14] In general, plain dress
involves the covering of much of the body (often including the head,
forearms and calves), with minimal ornamentation, rejecting print
fabrics, trims, fasteners, and jewelry. Non-essential elements of
garments such as neckties, collars, and lapels may be minimized or
omitted. Practical garments such as aprons and shawls may be layered
over the basic ensemble. Plain dress garments are often handmade and may
be produced by groups of women in the community for efficiency and to
ensure uniformity of style. Plain dress practices can extend to the
grooming of hair and beards and may vary somewhat to accommodate stages
in the life cycle such as allowing children and older people more
latitude.[15]

Within these general practices, distinctions abound. In some groups, for
example, the women's preferred head covering is lacy or translucent; in
others, it must be opaque.

### Anabaptist

The traditional plain dress worn by the
[Anabaptists](Anabaptists "wikilink") and other religious groups has
long sleeves with a set waist, long skirt, and no adornment. It denotes
"utility, modesty, long wear and inconspicuousness", does not display
any trademark, and is not dictated by fashion trends. Shawl, aprons,
bonnets and cap are part of plain dress.[16]

Clothing worn by [Bruderhof](Bruderhof "wikilink") women includes a
[headcovering](Christian_headcovering "wikilink"),[17] as well as long
skirts or dresses; men wear contemporary clothes of a modest nature.[18]

### Quaker

As a part of their [testimony of
simplicity](testimony_of_simplicity "wikilink"),
[Quakers](Quakers "wikilink") (Religious Society of Friends)
traditionally wore plain dress; "Ruffles and lace and other forms of
ornamentation, as well as unnecessary cuffs and collars and lapels and
buttons, were forbidden."[19][20] [George Fox](George_Fox "wikilink")
implored fellow Quakers to wear plain dress:[21] This classical Quaker
belief practice continues to be maintained by [Conservative
Friends](Conservative_Friends "wikilink"), as well as the [Central
Yearly Meeting of
Friends](Central_Yearly_Meeting_of_Friends "wikilink").[22][23]

### Methodist

![](Tabernacle_of_Wesleyan_Methodist_Campground.jpg "fig:Tabernacle_of_Wesleyan_Methodist_Campground.jpg")
girls enter the [tabernacle](tabernacle_(Methodist) "wikilink") at a
[camp meeting](camp_meeting "wikilink").\]\] Early
[Methodists](Methodists "wikilink") wore plain dress, with Methodist
clergy condemning "high headdresses, ruffles, laces, gold, and 'costly
apparel' in general".[24] [John Wesley](John_Wesley "wikilink"), the
founder of the Methodist movement, recommended that Methodists read his
thoughts *On Dress*, in which he detailed acceptable types and colors of
fabrics, in addition to "shapes and sizes of hats, coats, sleeves, and
hairstyles";[25] in that sermon, John Wesley expressed his desire for
Methodists: "Let me see, before I die, a Methodist congregation, full as
plain dressed as a Quaker congregation."[26] He also taught, with
respect to [Christian headcovering](Christian_headcovering "wikilink"),
that women, "especially in a religious assembly", should "keep on her
veil".[27][28] Those who tried to [attend Methodist
services](church_attendance "wikilink") in costly apparel were denied
admittance.[29] Wesley's teaching was based on his interpretation of and
, which he stated led him to conclude that "expensive clothes puff up
their wearers, promote vanity, incite anger, inflame lust, retard the
pursuit of holiness, and steal from God and the poor."[30] The 1858
Discipline of the [Wesleyan Methodist
Connection](Wesleyan_Methodist_Church_(United_States) "wikilink") stated
that "we would not only ejoin on all who fear God plain dress, but we
would recommend to our preachers and people, according to Mr. Wesley's
views expressed in his sermon on the inefficiency of Christianity,
published but a few years before his death, and containing his matured
judgment, distinguishing plainnessâ€”*Plainness* which will publicly
comment them to the maintenance of their Christian profession wherever
they may be."[31] The 1859 novel *[Adam Bede](Adam_Bede "wikilink")*
portrayed the Methodist [itinerant
preacher](Methodist_local_preacher "wikilink"), [Dinah
Morris](Dinah_Morris "wikilink"), wearing plain dress, with the words "I
saw she was a Methodist, or Quaker, or something of that sort, by her
dress".[32] [Peter
Cartwright](Peter_Cartwright_(revivalist) "wikilink"), a Methodist
[revivalist](Christian_revival "wikilink"), lamented the decline of
wearing plain dress among Methodists, stating:[33] While few wear plain
dress in mainline Methodism today, some Methodist Churches of the
[conservative holiness
movement](conservative_holiness_movement "wikilink"), such as the
[Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist
Connection](Allegheny_Wesleyan_Methodist_Connection "wikilink") and
[Evangelical Wesleyan Church](Evangelical_Wesleyan_Church "wikilink"),
continue to dress plainly,[34][35] also avoiding the wearing of jewelry
(inclusive of wedding rings).[36]

### Moravian

Historically, members of the [Moravian
Church](Moravian_Church "wikilink") wore plain dress:[37]

## Theological bases

Plain dressing Christians cite Paul's advice to the Romans, "Be [not
conformed to this world](nonconformity_to_the_world "wikilink")," as one
Biblical basis for their distinctive dress. Other scripture passages
counsel women to wear head coverings while praying (), not to cut their
hair (), and for men not to shave or cut their beards ().[38]

The rejection of extravagant clothing is further established in [39][40]

## Social effects

Plain dress may establish a sense of belonging within the community
while also marking the group's members as different in the wider
society. Some practitioners describe their dress as a protection from
unwanted attention. Quaker minister [Elizabeth
Fry](Elizabeth_Fry "wikilink") considered her plain dress to serve as "a
hedge against the world", and "a sort of protector".[41] Marketing
through the internet has these sites which propagate plain dress:
"Quaker Jane", "Plain and Simple Headcoverings", "Rachelâ€™s Seamstress
Services" and "Mennonite Maidens".[42]

Simple dress, considered "sensible and useful" and necessary, is
sometimes hard to find as the clothing market is dictated by fashion
conscious people who consider plain dress dull.[43]

## In literature

Dressing heroines in [Victorian
literature](Victorian_literature "wikilink") in plain dress is often
assumed to be a way of making characters appear classless and
sexless.[44] Others argue that authors like [Charlotte
BrontÃ«](Charlotte_BrontÃ« "wikilink"), [George
Eliot](George_Eliot "wikilink"), and [Anthony
Trollope](Anthony_Trollope "wikilink") use plain dress to highlight the
marriageability of the character, sexualizing her by emphasizing the
female body within.[45][46] Additionally, plain dress may signify a
character's rejection of societal norms and willingness to leave the
household to act on her desires.[47]

## Gallery

<File:Mennonite> Women Dressmaking Pennsylvania 1942.jpg\|[Pennsylvania
Dutch](Pennsylvania_Dutch "wikilink") Mennonite woman in 1942
<File:Mennonite> Family - Campeche - Mexico - 02.jpg\|An [Old Colony
Mennonite](Old_Colony_Mennonites "wikilink") family in
[Campeche](Campeche "wikilink"), Mexico <File:Mennonites> on New River,
Belize detail.jpg\|Old Colony Mennonites on [New
River](New_River_(Belize) "wikilink"), [Belize](Belize "wikilink")
<File:Menonite> Children.JPG\|Two plain dressed Old Colony Mennonite
boys near [Lamanai](Lamanai "wikilink") in [Belize](Belize "wikilink")
<File:Hutterer-Crystal>
Schule1.jpg\|[Schmiedeleut](Schmiedeleut "wikilink") Hutterites at
school <File:Hutterer-Chor1.jpeg%7CSchmiedeleut>
[Hutterites](Hutterite "wikilink") singing a [hymn](hymn "wikilink")
<File:Hutterer-Frauen> bei der Arbeit.jpg\|Schmiedeleut Hutterite women
at work <File:Hutterite> Sunset.jpg\|Schmiedeleut Hutterite women return
from working in the fields <File:Amish> Family in Aylmer,
Ontario.jpg\|Amish in [Aylmer, Ontario](Aylmer,_Ontario "wikilink")
<File:Femmes-Amish.jpg%7CAmish> women at the beach, [Chincoteague,
Virginia](Chincoteague,_Virginia "wikilink") <File:Amish> - On the way
to school by Gadjoboy-crop.jpg\|Amish children on the way to school
<File:AmishRakingHay.jpg%7CAmish> man from one of the very plain "one
suspender" groups in southeast Ohio

## See also

-   [Plain people](Plain_people "wikilink")
-   [Journeyman uniform in
    Germany](Journeyman_years#Journeyman_uniform_in_Germany "wikilink")
-   [Normcore](Normcore "wikilink")
-   [Modest Fashion](Modest_Fashion "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Understanding Plain
    Dress](https://justplainmarie.ca/why-do-mennonites-dress-like-that/)
    (Mennonite)
-   [Plain Resources](http://www.quakerquaker.org/notes/Plain_Resources)
    (Quaker)
-   [On Dress by John
    Wesley](https://www.umcmission.org/Find-Resources/John-Wesley-Sermons/Sermon-88-On-Dress)
    (Methodist)

[Category:Anabaptism](Category:Anabaptism "wikilink")
[Category:Methodism](Category:Methodism "wikilink") [Category:Simple
living](Category:Simple_living "wikilink") [Category:Clothing by
function](Category:Clothing_by_function "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15] Reynolds, Margaret C.; Bronner, Simon J. (2001). [*Plain Women:
Gender and Ritual in the Old Order River
Brethren*](https://books.google.com/books?id=a1LR3w4D0c4C&pg=PA61) Penn
State Press. pp. 61â€“96.

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25] Journals of Wesley, Nehemiah Curnock, ed.,London: Epworth Press
1938, p. 468.

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29] Rupert Davies, A History of the Methodist Church in Great Britain,
London : Epworth, 1965, p.197.

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38] Torrey, Mary Ide (1838). [*Ornament, or the Christian Rule of
Dress*](https://books.google.com/books?id=h0cZAAAAYAAJ) Crocker &
Brewster.

[39]

[40]

[41] Caton, Mary Anne (2003). "[The Aesthetics of Absence: Quaker
Women's Plain Dress in the Delaware Valley,
1790â€“1900"](https://books.google.com/books?id=xfZGThbyn-AC&lpg=PA246) in
Emma Jones Lapsansky and Anne A. Verplanck, eds., *Quaker Aesthetics:
Reflections on a Quaker Ethic in American Design and Consumption,
1720â€“1920*. University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 246â€“271.

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]