---
title: Adidas Yeezy
permalink: /Adidas_Yeezy/
---

**Adidas Yeezy** is a fashion collaboration between German sportswear
brand [Adidas](/Adidas "wikilink") and American designer [Kanye
West](/Kanye_West "wikilink"). The collaboration has become notable for
its sneakers, and the Yeezy Boost sneaker line has been considered one
of the most influential sneaker brands in the world.[1] While mostly
known for its sneakers, the collaboration also produced shirts, jackets,
track pants, socks, and women's shoes.

## History

Kanye West originally designed a shoe for Adidas in 2006, but it was
never released.[2] The first brand to officially collaborate with Kanye
West was Bape. Together, West and Bape released a pair of Bapesta
"College Dropout" shoes, which are now quite rare and garner high resell
prices.[3] He has also designed shoes for Louis Vuitton and Giuseppe
Zanotti, and (most notably) Nike.[4] His collaboration with Nike lasted
for five years and led to the release of a total of three (two
silhouettes, Yeezy 1 and the Yeezy 2) sneaker styles. In 2013, after the
release of the "Red October" Air Yeezy 2s, Kanye West officially left
Nike. Although West described this break as "heartbreaking", he claimed
that Nike would not pay him royalties for his shoe designs, instead
offering to pay some of the proceeds to a charity of West's choice. This
ultimately led West to reach out to Adidas. Adidas agreed to give him
royalties, and West described the CEO of Adidas as "someone who allowed
\[him\] to build something".[5] In February 2015, a year and three
months after the confirmation of the Adidas and Kanye West
collaboration, the collaboration officially debuted. "Yeezy Season 1"
was highly anticipated and celebrities such as
[Rihanna](/Rihanna "wikilink"), [Diddy](/Sean_Combs "wikilink"), and
[Kim Kardashian](/Kim_Kardashian "wikilink") were at the showing. "Yeezy
Season 2" and "Yeezy Season 3" also saw notable amounts of success upon
their releases.

## Clothing

"Yeezy Season 1" was released on October 29th, 2015, and was the first
apparel collection to release from this collaboration.[6][7] This
collection was noted for its stripped-down,
[ready-to-wear](/ready-to-wear "wikilink") style, which drew on military
clothing and flesh-toned colors.[8] The prices ranged from $600 for
sweatpants to $3,000 for jackets.[9] Although the footwear sold out
quickly, the apparel collection did not. West revealed in a 2018
interview that he was in talks with Louis Vuitton for a $30 million
apparel deal. The deal was not approved by the LVMH board and West was
left with no clothing partners. After the "Yeezy Season 1" show, Adidas
announced they would no longer be a part of Yeezy apparel, instead
focusing on the footwear collection with West. With Yeezy Season 6,
Adidas and West re-introduced several articles of clothing with Adidas
branding.[10]

## Footwear

As of December, 2017, a total of 19 colorways and 6 designs have been
released between the Adidas and Yeezy collaboration.[11] Through a
combination of factors including popularization by celebrities, Adidas
Yeezy sneakers have come to be extremely influential and highly
coveted.[12]

Most of the shoes utilize [Adidas's Boost
material](/Boost_(material) "wikilink"), noted for being an extremely
comfortable material for the wearer's feet.[13]

### Yeezy Boost 750

On December 3, 2013, Adidas confirmed a new shoe collaboration deal with
West.[14] On February 8, 2015, the name and design for the [Kanye
West](/Kanye_West "wikilink") and [Adidas](/Adidas "wikilink")
collaboration shoe was revealed, but West did not design the shoes. On
February 10 Adidas revealed posters of the Yeezy Boost 750 "Light Brown"
throughout their flagship stores. The Yeezy boost 750 "Light Brown" was
initially released on February 14, 2015, exclusively for those who
confirmed a reservation through the Adidas mobile app. This initial
release of the Adidas Yeezy Boost 750 "Light Brown" was limited to 9000
pairs to be available only in [New York City](/New_York_City "wikilink")
via the Adidas smartphone app and sold out within 10 minutes.[15]
Between February 21 and February 28, the Yeezy Boost 750 "Light Brown"
was available through a wider range of retailers and boutiques.[16]

On June 11, 2016, Yeezy Season 2 began with the second set of releases
of the Yeezy Boost 750 "Glow in the Dark". The shoe was sold in an
all-grey color scheme with a phosphorescent (glow-in-the-dark) gum
outsole. The shoe features improved materials such as higher quality
suede and leather.

Two other colorways for the Yeezy Boost 750 were later released. One,
dubbed "Chocolate", featured a brown suede and leather upper with the
same fluorescent sole as the previous model. The other, dubbed "Triple
Black", was an all-black colorway with the same materials as the
Chocolate but with an all-black sole as well.

All the 750s retailed for $350, but due to their low production numbers
and high demand, generated very high resell costs.

### Yeezy Boost 350

[thumb\|Adidas Yeezy Boost 350 Pirate Black
animation.](/File:_Adidas_Yeezy_Boost_350_Pirate_Black.gif "wikilink")
[thumb\|Adidas Yeezy Boost "Oxford
Tan"](/File:_Adidas_Yeezy_Boost_"Oxford_Tan".jpg "wikilink") On June 27,
2015, the second shoe from the collaboration, the Yeezy Boost 350 was
made available through a worldwide release.[17] The shoe was first
released in a white and grey "Turtle Dove" color scheme. On August 22,
2015, an all-black version of the Yeezy Boost 350 released, known as the
"Pirate Black."[18] An olivine variant, the "Moonrock," was released
exclusively to stores who were vendors for the Yeezy Season 1 clothing
line.[19] The fourth and final version of Season 1's 350 Boost was the
"Oxford Tan," which featured a light-brown color scheme.[20] In early
2016, a revised version of the Pirate Black colorway was released.
Revisions included additional support and padding to the heel.[21]
However, both iterations are relatively identical in appearance. All
variants of the shoe retailed for $200.[22]

On August 27, 2016, the Yeezy Boost 350 re-released in infant sizes. The
shoe was released in the "Turtle Dove" and "Pirate Black" color
scheme.[23] There have been no further releases or restocks of the
sneaker, but the style was later re-imagined and reintroduced with the
"Yeezy Boost 350 V2". Yeezy 350 boost is also running shoes.

### Yeezy 950

The Yeezy 950 was first released on October 29, 2015 at select retail
stores and online.[24] It was part of the Yeezy season 1 collection and
came in four different colorways: Peyote, Moonrock, Chocolate, and
Pirate black. Each shoe was retailed at $500.[25] "The Adidas Yeezy 950
extended the Kanye West and Adidas partnership outside of the sneaker
space with its military duckboot inspired design."[26] There have been
no further releases of the sneaker.

### Yeezy 350 Cleat

The Adidas Yeezy 350 Football Boost "Turtle dove" colorway was
originally released on September 15, 2016.[27] The Yeezy 350 cleat
"Turtle Dove" is the first athletic footwear product from the Adidas and
Yeezy collaboration. "The shoe took the overall look and feel of the
Adidas Yeezy Boost 350 however they installed a Primeknit upper
reinforced with SprintSkin sitting on a 5-star cleat frame."[28] The
cleat was designed for [football](/gridiron_football "wikilink") and it
had made its first appearance in a 2016 [NFL kickoff
game](/National_Football_League_Kickoff_game "wikilink"). Texans wide
receiver [DeAndre Hopkins](/DeAndre_Hopkins "wikilink") was fined $6,000
for wearing the cleats because they broke the NFL uniform policy by not
having a solid base color.[29] [thumb\|Adidas Yeezy Boost v2
"Zebra"](/File:_Adidas_Yeezy_Boost_v2_"Zebra".jpg "wikilink") There have
been no further releases of this cleat.

### Yeezy Boost 350 V2

The Yeezy Boost 350 V2 "Beluga" was revealed at the Yeezy Season 3 show
and was released on September 24, 2016. It is considered a remake of the
previous Yeezy Boost 350 and features several outer changes, such as a
different pattern, removed heel tab, and a large stripe running around
the outer side of the shoe with the characters "SPLY-350". The sole was
also updated to be transparent and featured full-length visibility of
the boost material midsole through a grid-pattern opening on the
outsole. On September 24, 2016, the Yeezy Boost V2 "Beluga” officially
released.[30] It featured an all Grey outsole and prime knit, with a
large colored orange stripe with the characters "SPLY-350". On November
23, 2016, three new colorways released, "Copper", "Green", and "Red",
featuring an all-black outsole and prime knit, with a large colored
stripe with the words "SPLY-350". A “Core Black/Core White” colorway,
dubbed "Oreo", was released on December 17, 2016. It also featured a
black outsole and prime knit, as well as a white stripe across the shoe.

A notable change to the Yeezy Boost 350 V2 line was when a black and
red, or "Bred", colorway released February 11, 2017.[31] The colorway
possesses a "triple black" colorway, with the "SPLY-350" displayed in a
red tint. Additionally, the Zebras officially became the first 350 to
opt-out of the prominent stripe. A "Zebra" colorway was released on
February 25, 2017, and later restocked online and in various Adidas
stores and retailers on June 24, 2017. The colorway featured prominent
black stripes over a never before seen white overlay, prompting a surge
of value and hype from the sneaker community.[32] On April 29, 2017, a
long-awaited model labeled as "Cream White" was released to the
public.[33] All such colorways were released for a retail price of $220.

Three new colorways of the Yeezy 350 V2 model later surfaced. A
"Semi-Frozen Yellow" colorway, featuring a bright yellow prime knit
upper and unique "gum soles", released on November 18, 2017 in limited
quantity.[34] Additionally, a colorway with a strikingly familiar
pattern (to the first release of the Yeezy 350 V2 ) dubbed the "Beluga
2.0" released at various retailers in large quantity seven days after
the "Semi-Frozen Yellow" released on November 25, 2017.[35] It
subsequently restocked on the 30th of November. The third colorway,
"Blue Tint," was released the December 16th. All colorways have opted to
possess consistent prime knit patterns without a prominent stripe on the
sides; however, the iconic "SPLY-350" will still be retained on all
three pairs with prices being set at $220.

In 2018, many colorways of the 350 V2 were released, and there were also
many restocks. On June 30, the first new 350 V2 colorway of 2018 dropped
called the "Butter".[36] The Triple White color restocked on September
21 [37] and was said to have been the biggest Yeezy drop ever. On
November 16, the zebra colorway of the 350 restocked.[38] Shortly after,
a new colorway called the “Sesame” released on Black Friday of 2018
(November 23). It featured a grey upper, with a white boost and midsole,
completed with a gum-colored outsole.[39] On (Friday) December 14th,
2018 the Frozen Yellows re-released in stores. The final 350 V2 Yeezys
to release in 2018 would be the White Statics in both "Reflective and
Non-Reflective". On December 26th the (Reflective) White Statics
released on Yeezy Supply only. These featured a very different design
and had a very low quantity produced. Then on December 27th, the
(non-reflective) White Statics were released. All 350 V2 releases in
2018, including the special "(Reflective) White Static", maintained the
$220 USD/ $300 CAD price tag.[40]

2019 saw the release of more colorways for the 350 V2, including the
"Butter", "True Form", "Hyperspace", "Clay", "Glow in the Dark",
"Black", "Black Reflective", "Antlia", "Antlia Reflective", "Synth",
"Synth Reflective", "Lundmark", "Lundmark Reflective", "Cloud White",
"Cloud White Reflective", "Citrin", and "Citrin Reflective". Following
in the footsteps of the late 2018 release of the "Statics", many of the
2019 releases for the 350 V2 had a normal and "reflective" version of
the sneaker drop, allowing there to be a more limited and hyped-up
release for the reflective shoe while still allowing more people to
acquire the more readily-available regular version of the colorways.

### Yeezy Powerphase

The Adidas Powerphase was released on March 28, 2017.[41] "The retro
sneakers are an update of an Adidas trainer from the '80s. They feature
a premium white leather upper with perforated stripes, green Adidas
branding, and a red Trefoil logo."[42] A tonal grey colorway released
globally on December 9th, 2017 for a retail price of $120; [43] a "Core
Black" colorway released shortly after on March 17, 2018. After the
initial 3 colorways of the Yeezy Powerphase, Adidas then continued
releasing several Powerphase colorways without the Yeezy branding, as
well as a few more with it.

### Yeezy Boost 700

The Adidas Yeezy Boost 700 was debuted during the Yeezy Season 5 fashion
show in 2017. The shoe released on August 12, 2017, for $300,
exclusively via Yeezy Supply. At the time, two colorways of white/gum
and black were also expected to release in 2018.[44] The shoe itself has
faced large amounts of controversy due to its appearance. However, the
latter half of 2019 saw a resurgence of the model in the streetwear
scene, especially in the original "Wave Runner" colorway.

The Yeezy 700 was released in three different colorways: the "Wave
Runner", "Mauve", and "Salt" colorways. Another colorway called the
"Inertia" released on March 9, 2019.[45] Additionally, two colorways of
the Yeezy Boost 700 V2 were made, the "Static" and "Geode" colorways. On
March 23, 2019, the 700 V2 “Geode” colorway was released synchronously
with a nationwide lemonade stand charity campaign raising money for the
National Alliance of Mental Illness.[46] All proceeds from stand sales
were donated to NAMII, which is the “largest grassroots mental health
organization dedicated to building better lives for the millions of
Americans affected by mental illness.”

### Yeezy 500

Desert Rat Colorway - This Adidas Yeezy 500 was released on December
2017, as a pre-order with delivery slated for March 2018. It was only
available in a colorway later called Blush, and only available in a
bundle with a hoodie and sweat shorts. Later, the Super Moon Yellow,
Utility Black, and Salt colorways were released.

While at first being criticized for their visual appearance, the Yeezy
500 at one point gained immense popularity and was reselling for
hundreds of dollars over its original retail price, with Blush being the
most sought after out of the four colorways. Since then, the value has
died down, and the shoes sell for only slightly above retail in many
sizes (as of September 2019).

## References

## External links

-   [Adidas Yeezy official website](http://www.adidas.com/yeezy)
-   [Adidas](http://adidas.com/)

[Category: Shoes](/Category:_Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Kanye
West](/Category:Kanye_West "wikilink")

[1]

[2] SneakerNews.com\|date=2016-04-18\|website=Sneaker
News\|language=en-US\|access-date=2019-09-24}}

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26] adidas {{!}} Sole Collector\|website=Sole
Collector\|language=en\|access-date=2017-07-24}}

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34] <https://sneakernews.com/2017/10/18/adidas-yeezy-boost-350-v2-semi-frozen-yellow-release-date/>

[35] <https://sneakernews.com/2017/10/24/adidas-yeezy-boost-350-v2-beluga-2-0-release-date/>

[36] <https://hypebae.com/2018/6/adidas-yeezy-boost-350-v2-butter-official-images-release-date>

[37] <https://sneakernews.com/2018/08/20/adidas-yeezy-boost-350-v2-cream-restock-info/>

[38] <http://justfreshkicks.com/yeezy-350-v2-zebra-2018-restock-links/>

[39] <https://sneakernews.com/2018/11/22/adidas-yeezy-350-sesame-release-details/>

[40] <https://sneakerbardetroit.com/adidas-yeezy-boost-350-v2-static-ef2905-release-date/>

[41]

[42]

[43] <https://sneakernews.com/2017/12/01/adiads-yeezy-powerphase-calabasas-grey-store-list/>

[44]

[45]

[46]