![](Piled_Bakya.png "Piled_Bakya.png")

The **Bakyâ** or wooden [clogs](clogs "wikilink")[1] were once the most
commonly used footwear in the [Philippines](Philippines "wikilink")
before the introduction of rubber sandals. This footwear is made from
local light wood like [santol](santol_(fruit) "wikilink") and laniti. It
is cut to the desired foot size before being shaven until smooth. The
side of the *bakyâ* is thick enough to be carved with floral, geometric
or landscape designs, a unique method in Southeast Asia for the artist's
application of oneself towards the clog.[2] Afterwards, the bakyâ could
then be painted or varnished, traditionally, on the specification of the
person who would wear it. Uppers of traditional rattan or tight cloth
(or modern plastic or rubber)[3] will then be fastened using *clavitos*
(tiny nails). The finished product has been a symbol of the masses since
its popularity. However, since the early 21st century, the usage of the
*bakyâ* has been revived by the upper classes of society, effectively
changing the symbolism of the footwear from mass representation to
holistic societal representation. A bill in the Philippine Congress
described the *bakyâ* as having 'reference to the Filipinos' humble
beginnings'.[4]It has been proposed as the *National Slipper of the
Philippines* since 2014.[5]

## Use

![](Tagalog_dress,_early_1800s.jpg "fig:Tagalog_dress,_early_1800s.jpg")
wearing *bakyâ* in the 19th century. *From*Aventures d'un Gentilhomme
Breton aux iles Philippines'' by Paul de la Gironiere, published in
1855.\]\]

The bakyâ has been in use for centuries in the Philippines, minimally in
the pre-colonial era, and widely in the Spanish era in the 16th century
to 18th century. Additional designs and motifs were added during the
colonial era. Its peak popularity was in the 1950s during the American
colonial era and was a common souvenir for Americans visiting the
country. However, the bakyâ industry dwindled with the introduction of
rubber slippers. By the 1990s it was rarely used although it was a
common footwear used during cultural presentations and in
[Anitism](Dambana "wikilink") lifestyle. By the 2010s, its usage was
revived by the upper levels of society and Anitism adherents. In certain
areas in the Philippines, the footwear is also used as gifts for
weddings and a form of trophy for competition winners.[6][7]

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Clogs (shoes)](Category:Clogs_(shoes) "wikilink")
[Category:Philippine clothing](Category:Philippine_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Pejoratives](Category:Pejoratives "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]