![](BeanBoots.jpg "fig:BeanBoots.jpg") **Bean Boots** (originally named
**Maine Hunting Shoes**) are a type of water-resistant 'duck boots'
manufactured by [L.L.Bean](L.L.Bean "wikilink").[1] They are constructed
from a rubber sole and a leather upper. The boots were created in 1911
and were an instant success. The boots became an item of clothing
connected to elite prep schools. In the 2010s, the boots experienced a
resurgence in popularity leading to a shortage, as demand exceeded
production capacity.

## Creation

The first pairs of Bean Boots were created in 1911.[2] [Leon Leonwood
Bean](Leon_Leonwood_Bean "wikilink") was an avid
[outdoorsman](Outdoor_enthusiast "wikilink") and hunter from [Freeport,
Maine](Freeport,_Maine "wikilink"). On one of his hunting trips, Bean
noticed that his feet were getting wet and cold in his usual pair of
hunting boots. He decided to combine the rubber soles of [rain
boots](Wellington_boot "wikilink") with leather uppers, and convinced a
local cobbler to assemble the shoes.[3] In 1912, Bean formed the [L.L.
Bean Company](L.L._Bean "wikilink") to market and sell the shoes.

While the first 100 pairs of the boots sold quickly, they had a defect
in the connection between the rubber and the leather. Bean returned all
of his customers' money, and convinced [US
Rubber](United_States_Rubber_Company "wikilink") to make specialty soles
for his boots.[4] After the switch to the specialty soles, the boots
were an instant success. The only subsequent change to the boots was the
addition of a [chain pattern](Chain "wikilink") design in 1947.[5]

## Fashion

Bean Boots are considered to be part of [prep
fashion](Preppy "wikilink") due to their classic design and use at elite
prep schools in New England.[6] *[The Official Preppy
Handbook](The_Official_Preppy_Handbook "wikilink")* calls them "the
second most important shoe (after [Weejun loafers](Weejuns "wikilink"))
in the preppy male's wardrobe."[7] In the 2010s, the boots became
trendy.[8] This has led to widespread shortages of the shoes. While some
suspected that the shortage was manufactured, the company maintained
that it is because the shoes are still made in Maine and stitched by
hand, and points to the price not changing as evidence that they weren't
taking advantage of the trend.[9]

## Notes

[Category:L.L. Bean](Category:L.L._Bean "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Products
introduced in 1911](Category:Products_introduced_in_1911 "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]