**[Bernardo](Bernardo "wikilink") Sandals** was founded in 1946 by
architect [Bernard Rudofsky](Bernard_Rudofsky "wikilink") and [Berta
Rudofsky](Berta_Rudofsky "wikilink"). The Rudofskys went into sandal
design following the 1944 exhibition, "Are Clothes Modern?" that Mr.
Rudofsky curated at the [Museum of Modern
Art](Museum_of_Modern_Art "wikilink") in [New York
City](New_York_City "wikilink").[1]

## Description

The core ideas of the designs were those Bertha taught at [Black
Mountain College](Black_Mountain_College "wikilink"). Monika Platzer
writes, in the book *Lessons from Bernard Rudofsky*, "In contrast to
closed footwear, which he condemned as "foot-deformers," Rudofsky
preached the virtues of sandals as "non-concealing footwear; they
represented a suitable type of shoe, one that transcended
conventionality and ever-changing fashions."[2]

The first collection was presented at the [Ritz Carlton
Hotel](Ritz_Carlton_Hotel "wikilink") in
[Manhattan](Manhattan "wikilink"), and featured only 6 designs.[3] All
six designs consisted of strappy uppers on an asymmetrical leather sole
that was pancake flat. The collection was immediately successful, and in
the 1950s and 1960s high-end fashion magazines such as
*[Vogue](Vogue_(magazine) "wikilink")* and *[Harper's
Bazaar](Harper's_Bazaar "wikilink")* regularly featured Bernardo sandals
in fashion editorials.[4] By the 1960s [Jackie
Kennedy](Jackie_Kennedy "wikilink") was said to own 16 colors of the
same pair.[5] The current Bernardo sandal line includes several of
Rudofsky's original designs and are handmade in both Italy and Brazil.

## Growth

In 1953, Dino Sonnino bought Bernardo Sandals from Aldo Bruzzichelli,
the co-founder (with Bernard Rudofsky) and owner of Bernardo Sandals.
Rudofsky remained as designer of Bernardo Sandals for one more year,
then returned to Italy to pursue his profession as architect. His time
with Bernardo was always intended as temporary, until such time that the
war-devastated Italian economy would start recovering and provide work
for architects. Upon Rudofsky's departure to Italy, Dino Sonnino needed
a new designer for Bernardo Sandals, at the time a tiny business with a
small factory in New York City, on Walker Street in Tribeca. There were
only four employees, with all production made at the Walker Street
factory (the building still exists, having become residential with loft
apartments). Dino Sonnino's wife, Eva Sonnino, who grew up in Milan,
Italy and had a strong sense of fashion, became the temporary designer,
until a new designer was found. But Eva Sonnino immediately proved
herself to be a successful designer for Bernardo Sandals, and the job
was hers permanently.

It was under the management of Dino Sonnino and the design of Eva
Sonnino that Bernardo grew from a tiny, unknown manufacturer of women's
sandals to the best known sandal company in the United States. Eva
Sonnino won the Nieman Marcus award for best women's shoe designer in
1967, and was constantly asked by Vogue and Harpers Bazaar to create
special designs for their editorials, including one in conjunction with
the James Bond movie "Goldfinger", gold-colored sandals worn by a model
covered in gold body paint. In 1967 Eva Sonnino was asked by Kay Hayes,
the Vogue shoe editor, to create a sandal with straps going up to the
knee for a Vogue editorial. She responded by saying she would create a
sandal with straps going up to the hip which she fitted on the top model
Verushka. Kay Hayes liked it so much that she ordered a white leather
pair for a NYC broadcast TV show with Tippy Hedren (the star of Alfred
Hitchcock's movie "The Birds") modeling the sandal. Dino and Eva helped
Tippy strap up the sandals and were interviewed on the show with Tippy.
Bernardo's became a sort of cult fashion item, even with college girls,
as documented by 'The Official Preppy Handbook", at the time an arbiter
of college youth fashion.

## Special collections

By the mid to late sixties, Eva Sonnino was designing special
collections for Emilio Pucci evening wear. Emilio Pucci was so
enthusiastic about her designs and Dino Sonnino's business leadership,
that he invited them to move their headquarters next to his compound
outside Florence, Italy, in the Tuscan countryside, all at his expense.
He was going to provide a villa and design facilities for Bernardo,
wishing to benefit from the creative synergies to expand into
accessories such as hand bags. The invitation was tempting, but the
Sonnino's decided they didn't want to leave their simple life in New
York City for a glamorous one in Florence which would have involved a
hectic social life.

By the mid 1960s, Bernardo Sandals were no longer made just in New York
City (the tiny Walker Street factory having been moved to a large full
floor space on East 22nd Street between Broadway and Park Avenue
South/4th Avenue, the building having been converted to loft apartments
in the late 1970s). Manufacturing remained in New York City, but was
augmented by factories in upstate New York, Italy, and Spain. Additional
factories in Mexico and Brazil were being contemplated in the late
1960s. At that time, Dino and Eva Sonnino were both in their late 50's
and thinking about their retirement years. They asked their son, Edward
Sonnino (who had worked two summers at the firm after graduating from
high school, had visited various factories in Italy with his parents
over the years during summer vacation, and met the most important buyers
and Bernardo sales persons in the U.S.) whether he would be interested
in joining the firm after graduating from college and eventually taking
over from his parents. He declined because he did not yet have a feel
for fashion and therefore lacked the confidence necessary to
successfully lead a high fashion business. He also was not interested in
business at that young age.

## Company sold

Consequently, Dino and Eva Sonnino decided to find a buyer for their
company. Revlon, the world's leading cosmetics company at the time, made
the highest offer, but only payable in restricted Revlon stock. [R.G.
Barry](R.G._Barry_Corporation "wikilink"), listed on the American Stock
Exchange, a manufacturer of machine washable slippers with well-known
brands such as "DearFoams", ended up acquiring Bernardo, thinking it
could transform a relatively low-volume high-fashion company into a high
volume one. Under R.G Barry, Bernardo started a decline, no longer
having top management with competency in the high fashion business. R.G.
Barry underestimated the need for a top designer and for public
relations and advertising at the highest level. They underestimated the
importance of having a tight rapport with Vogue and Harpers Bazaar,
which led to countless high-impact editorials which strengthened the
Bernardo brand and increased visibility.

To this day, Eva Sonnino's designs remain emblematic of Bernardo
Sandals. They remain Bernardo's most successful designs. Starting in the
mid 1960s, all Vogue and Harpers Bazaar ads for Bernardo Sandals
credited Eva Sonnino as being the designer. While her designs were
essential for Bernardo's success, so were the management talents of her
husband, Dino Sonnino, who in the early years was Bernardo's top
salesman, being the only one, traveling around the country, knocking on
doors of department store buyers and independent shoe stores, often not
getting a moment's attention but not letting himself be discouraged.
Beyond his management talent, his perseverance, courage, and
determination were essential to raise the company from being unknown to
a fashion icon. Eva and Dino Sonnino were quite a husband and wife team,
creating a successful high fashion company practically from scratch in
less than fifteen years. Had Bernardo Sandals been sold to a company
understanding how to operate in the high fashion sector back in the late
1960s when it was by far the leading brand in women's sandals, it would
most probably be a leader today in women's high fashion shoes and
accessories.

## 1990

By 1990 the Bernardo Footwear line was downgraded in price and quality.
Owned by the Slaughter Brothers of Dallas, Texas, the sandals were 100%
man-made materials, production was switched to China, and the retail
price range was $25 to $35. 1993 was officially the last year under the
Slaughter Brother's ownership, as they officially stopped selling the
brand and closed it down.

Texan retailer Roy Smith teamed up with designer [Dennis
Comeau](Dennis_Comeau "wikilink") of [Florence](Florence "wikilink"),
Italy, who resigned from Prada to acquire the rights to the brand in
2001. Restructuring and relaunching the brand, they went back to making
a high-quality all leather product, manufacturing in Italy, and raised
the retail prices to the $100 plus market. Within a few years Bernardo
was once again carried by high-end stores such as Neiman Marcus,
Bloomingdales, [Harrod's](Harrod's "wikilink") and Fred Segal. The
sandals were frequently sighted and photographed by many big-name
celebrities, such as Reese Witherspoon, Hilary Duff, Vanessa Manillo,
[Jessica Alba](Jessica_Alba "wikilink"), Ruby Spiro, Robin Wright, and
[Halle Berry](Halle_Berry "wikilink").

In 2009 Comeau launched a subdivision labeled "Bernardo Vintage
Couture". With prices ranging from $250 to $600, the new line was bought
by very high end retailers worldwide, such as [Dover Street
Market](Dover_Street_Market "wikilink") in London, Jeffrey and [Bergdorf
Goodman](Bergdorf_Goodman "wikilink") in New York, [10 Corso
Como](10_Corso_Como "wikilink") in Milan, and Harvey Nichols in the UK
and Asia.

## 2011

In 2011, Bernardo Footwear was sold to a group of investors headed by
Peter Cooper. Cooper engaged in an important re-branding of Bernardo,
creating the brand identity and loop logo used on Bernardo shoes today.
Cooper also successfully created the Bernardo 1946 brand which
re-introduced Italian-made heritage styles from the 1950s and 1960s. Two
years later the brand was sold again, this time to Peter Grueterich,
previously owner of [Bruno Magli](Bruno_Magli "wikilink") and founder of
the Peter Marcus Group, which specializes in luxury footwear
distribution.

## Notes

<references/>

## External links

-   <http://www.bernardousa.com/>
-   <https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bernardo_Sandals_paired_with_Emilio_Pucci_pants.jpg>
    ![](Eva_Sonnino_and_Dino_Sonnino.jpg "fig:Eva_Sonnino_and_Dino_Sonnino.jpg")<https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Eva_Sonnino_and_Emilio_Pucci_photo_in_%22It%27s_the_Barry%27s!%22.jpg>
    ![](Eva_Sonnino,_Designer,_Bernardo_Sandals_1954-1970.jpg "fig:Eva_Sonnino,_Designer,_Bernardo_Sandals_1954-1970.jpg")Eva
    Sonnino, Designer, Bernardo Sandals 1954-1970

![`Dino_Sonnino,_President,_Bernardo_Sandals_1954-1970.jpg`](Dino_Sonnino,_President,_Bernardo_Sandals_1954-1970.jpg "fig:Dino_Sonnino,_President,_Bernardo_Sandals_1954-1970.jpg")`Dino Sonnino, President, Bernardo Sandals 1954-1970 `

-   <https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Eva_Sonnino_at_Bernardo_Sandals_showroom_in_New_York_City.jpg>

[Category:Sandals](Category:Sandals "wikilink") [Category:Shoe companies
of the United
States](Category:Shoe_companies_of_the_United_States "wikilink")
[Category:Companies established in
1946](Category:Companies_established_in_1946 "wikilink")

[1] "Are Clothes Modern?" By Carol Kino, 24 February 2008, The *New York
Times*

[2] *Lessons from Bernard Rudofsky*, pg. 28, edited by Monika Platzer,
Birkhauser Verlag AG, Basel, Switzerland, 2007,

[3] "CLASSIC SANDALS SPONSORED FOR COMFORT AND STYLE; WHITE LEADS FOR
EVERY SPRING AND SUMMER OCCASION," The *New York Times*, 30 April 1946

[4] *Bernard Rudofsky: A Humane Designer*, pg. 77, Andrea Bocco
Guarneri, Springer-Verlag, Wien, 2003,

[5] "Are Clothes Modern?" By Carol Kino, 24 February 2008, The *New York
Times*