**Biodegradable athletic footwear** is [athletic
footwear](athletic_footwear "wikilink") that uses [biodegradable
materials](biodegradable_material "wikilink") with the ability to
compost at the [end-of-life](End-of-life_(product) "wikilink") phase.
Such materials include [natural biodegradable
polymers](Biopolymer "wikilink"), [synthetic biodegradable
polymers](synthetic_biodegradable_polymer "wikilink"), and
[biodegradable blends](Bioplastic "wikilink"). The use of biodegradable
materials is a long-term solution to [landfill](landfill "wikilink")
pollution that can significantly help protect the natural environment by
replacing the synthetic, non-biodegradable polymers found in athletic
footwear.

## Problem of non-degradable waste

The United States athletic shoe market is a $13 billion-per-year dollar
industry that sells more than 350 million pairs of athletic shoes
annually.[1] The global footwear consumption has nearly doubled every
twenty years, from 2.5 billion pairs in 1950 to more than 19 billion
pairs of shoes in 2005.[2] The increase in demand for athletic shoe
products have progressively decreased the useful lives of shoes as a
result of the rapid market changes and new consumer trends. A shorter
life cycle of athletic footwear has begun to create non-degradable waste
in [landfills](landfill "wikilink") due to synthetic and other
[non-biodegradable](non-biodegradable "wikilink") materials used in
production. The considerable growth in industrial production and
consumption has made the athletic footwear industry face the
environmental challenge of generated
[end-of-life](End-of-life_(product) "wikilink") waste.

## Ethylene vinyl acetate copolymer

The athletic shoe [midsole](midsole "wikilink") is one of the main
contributors that lead to a generation of end-of-life waste because it
is composed of [polymeric foams](polymeric_foam "wikilink") based on
[ethylene-vinyl acetate](ethylene-vinyl_acetate "wikilink") (EVA).[3]
EVA is a polyolefin copolymer of [ethylene](ethylene "wikilink") and
[vinyl acetate](vinyl_acetate "wikilink") that provides durability and
flexibility, making it the most commonly used material found in athletic
shoe midsoles.[4] Although the [synthetic
polymer](synthetic_polymer "wikilink") is a useful material for the
athletic shoe industry, it has become an environmental concern because
of its poor [biodegradability](biodegradability "wikilink"). EVA goes
through an [anaerobic decomposition](anaerobic_decomposition "wikilink")
process called [thermal degradation](thermal_degradation "wikilink")
that often occurs in landfills resulting in releases of [volatile
organic compounds](volatile_organic_compound "wikilink") (VOCs) into the
air.[5] VOCs "contribute to the formation of [tropospheric
ozone](tropospheric_ozone "wikilink"), which is harmful to humans and
plant life."[6] Thermal degradation of EVA is temperature dependent and
occurs in two stages; in the first stage [acetic
acid](acetic_acid "wikilink") is lost, followed by the degradation of
the unsaturated [polyethylene](polyethylene "wikilink") polymer.[7]
![](Thermal_Degradation_of_EVA_by_allylic_scission..jpg "fig:Thermal_Degradation_of_EVA_by_allylic_scission..jpg")
of EVA by [allylic](allylic "wikilink")
[scission](Scission_(chemistry) "wikilink").[8]\]\]

## Environmental impact

The [environmental impacts](environmental_impact "wikilink") of athletic
shoe degradation in landfills "are inextricably connected to the nature
of the materials."[9] The production of many
[petroleum](petroleum "wikilink")-based products, such as EVA, used to
manufacture athletic shoes result in serious [environmental
pollution](environmental_pollution "wikilink") of groundwater and rivers
when disposed into landfills.[10] When disposed in landfills, athletic
footwear can take up to thousands of years to naturally degrade. EVA
athletic shoe midsoles can be kept in contact with moist soil for a
period of 12 years and experience little to no evidence of bio
deterioration.[11]

Although there are some that are taking initiatives to produce
environmentally friendly athletic footwear, most of the footwear
industry’s response to this increasing problem of end-of-life shoe waste
has been negligible.[12] In order to reduce post-consumer waste and
improve environmental properties of athletic shoes, biodegradable
materials can help to replace [synthetic
polymers](synthetic_polymer "wikilink") such as ethylene vinyl acetate
with the ability to [compost](compost "wikilink") at the end-of-life
phase.

## Biodegradable materials

"[Biodegradation](Biodegradation "wikilink") is a [chemical
degradation](chemical_degradation "wikilink") of materials provoked by
the action of [microorganisms](microorganism "wikilink") such as
[bacteria](bacteria "wikilink"), [fungi](fungi "wikilink"), and
[algae](algae "wikilink")."[13] Although there are many materials
categorized as [biodegradable](biodegradable "wikilink"), there has been
an increasing interest of [biodegradable
polymers](biodegradable_polymer "wikilink") that can lead to [waste
management](waste_management "wikilink") options for polymers in the
environment. These biodegradable polymers can be broken down into three
categories: [natural biodegradable polymer](Biopolymer "wikilink"),
[synthetic biodegradable
polymer](synthetic_biodegradable_polymer "wikilink"), and [biodegradable
blends](Bioplastic "wikilink").[14]

### Natural biodegradable polymers

[Natural biodegradable polymers](Biopolymer "wikilink") are formed in
nature during growth cycles of all organisms.[15] When searching for
natural fibers to replace synthetic materials in athletic shoes, the
major natural biodegradable polymer that offers the most potential are
[polysaccharides](polysaccharide "wikilink"). Starch is a polysaccharide
that is useful because it readily degrades into harmless products when
placed in contact with soil microorganisms.[16]
![](Enzymatic_hydrolysis_of_starch..jpg "fig:Enzymatic_hydrolysis_of_starch..jpg")
[Starch](Starch "wikilink") is not often used alone as a plastic
material because of its brittle nature, but is commonly used as a
biodegradation additive.[17] Many [plasticizers](plasticizer "wikilink")
use starch-glycerol-water to modify starch’s brittle nature.[18]
Biodegradation of this blend was tested and was found that by the second
day the degraded carbon had already attained about 100% of the initial
carbon of the sample.[19]

### Synthetic biodegradable polymer

[Aliphatic polyesters](Aliphatic_compound "wikilink") are a diverse
family of **synthetic polymers** of which are biocompatible,
biodegradable, and non-toxic.[20] Specifically, [poly (lactic
acid)](Polylactic_acid "wikilink") has low melt strength and low
[viscosity](viscosity "wikilink") properties that are similar to EVA
midsoles in athletic shoes.[21] Poly (lactic acid) (PLA) is part of the
[poly (amide-enamine)](Polyamide "wikilink") group and can go through
[thermoplastic](thermoplastic "wikilink") and foaming processes.[22]
Along with its good mechanical properties, its popularity is based on
the non-toxic products that it becomes when it decomposes through
[hydrolytic degradation](Hydrolysis "wikilink").[23] Hydrolytic
degradation of PLA generates the monomer [lactic
acid](lactic_acid "wikilink"), which is metabolized via the
[tri-carboxylic acid cycle](tri-carboxylic_acid_cycle "wikilink") and
eliminated as [carbon dioxide](carbon_dioxide "wikilink").[24]
![](Hydrolytic_Degradation_of_the_aliphatic_polyester,_PLA..jpg "fig:Hydrolytic_Degradation_of_the_aliphatic_polyester,_PLA..jpg")

### Biodegradable blends

Most synthetic polymers are resistant to microbial attack because of
their physical and chemical properties.[25] However, they can become
biodegradable when introducing natural polymers such as starch. Natural
polymers introduce [ester](ester "wikilink") groups that attach to the
backbone of non-biodegradable polymers, making them more susceptible to
degradation.[26] Due to biodegradable polymers having limited
properties; blending synthetic polymers can bring economic advantages
and superior properties.[27]
![](Insertion_of_an_ester_group_into_vinyl_polymer..jpg "fig:Insertion_of_an_ester_group_into_vinyl_polymer..jpg").[28]\]\]

## End-of-life management

Although total elimination of [post-consumer
waste](post-consumer_waste "wikilink") is not encouraged by any current
[change-causing agent](Big_business "wikilink") due to the enormous
change in infrastructure that the elimination of waste requires and the
consequent lack of profitability for those agents, proactive approaches
to reduce the enormous amount of waste that 350 million pairs of
athletic shoes create can make a difference in the environment.
Biodegradable materials, such as biodegradable polymers, are a viable
solution to aid in avoiding the end-of-life athletic footwear waste
consumption.[29] The major advantage of introducing biodegradable
polymers to athletic footwear is the ability to compost with other
organic wastes for it to become useful soil attendant products.

An alternative short-term approach to
[end-of-life](End-of-life_(product) "wikilink") management is
[recycling](recycling "wikilink") activities in the footwear industry.
One major shoe manufacture, [Nike Inc.](Nike,_Inc. "wikilink"), created
[Reuse-A-Shoe](Nike_Grind "wikilink") program that involves recycling
discarded athletic shoes by grinding and shredding the shoes to produce
a material called [Nike Grind](Nike_Grind "wikilink"), which can be used
in surfacing for tennis and basketball playgrounds or running
tracks.[30] Currently, the Reuse-A-Shoe program recycles approximately
125,000 pairs of shoes per year in the United States.

Recycling and composting are two major proposed solutions to end-of-life
management. However, the use of biodegradable materials is a long-term
solution that can significantly help protect the natural environment by
replacing synthetic, non-biodegradable polymers found in athletic
footwear.

## References

[Category:Athletic shoes](Category:Athletic_shoes "wikilink")
[Category:Biodegradable
materials](Category:Biodegradable_materials "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] Chen, Nan. "The Effects of Crosslinking on Foaming." Diss. U of
Toronto, 2012. Abstract. (2012): n. pag. Print.

[5] Costache, Marius C., David D. Jiang, and Charles A. Wilkie. "Thermal
Degradation of Ethylene–vinyl Acetate Copolymer Nano composites."
Polymer 46.18 (2005): 6947-958. Web.

[6] Albers, Kyle, Peter Canepa, and Jennifer Miller. "Analyzing the
Environmental Impacts of Simple Shoes." Diss. U of Santa Barbara, 2008.
Abstract. (2008): n. pag. Print.

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11] Katarzyna Leja, Grazyna Lewandowicz. "Polymer Biodegradation and
Biodegradable Polymers-a Review." Polish Journal of Environmental
Studies 2nd ser. 19.2010 (2012): 255-66. Web.

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16] Díaz, Angélica, Ramaz Katsarava, and Jordi Puiggalí. "Synthesis,
Properties and Applications of Biodegradable Polymers Derived From Diols
and Dicarboxylic Acids: From Polyesters to Poly(Ester Amide)S."
International Journal of Molecular Sciences 15.5 (2014): 7064-7123.
Academic Search Complete. Web. 20 Oct. 2014.

[17]

[18] Wang, Xiu-Li, Ke-Ke Yang, and Yu-Zhong Wang. "Properties of Starch
Blends with Biodegradable Polymers." Journal of Macromolecular Science,
Part C: Polymer Reviews 43.3 (2003): 385-409. Web.

[19]

[20] Renard, E., V. Langlois, and P. Guérin. "Chemical Modifications of
Bacterial Polyesters: From Stability to Controlled Degradation of
Resulting Polymers." Corrosion Engineering, Science and Technology 42.4
(2007): 300-11. Web.

[21]

[22] Chandra, R. "Biodegradable Polymers." Progress in Polymer Science
23.7 (1998): 1273-335. Web.

[23] Albertsson, Ann-Christine. Degradable Aliphatic Polyesters. Vol.
157. Berlin: Springer, 2002. Print.

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27] Ma, Jianzhong, Liang Shao, Chaohua Xue, Fuquan Deng, and Zhouyang
Duan. "Compatibilization and Properties of Ethylene Vinyl Acetate
Copolymer (EVA) and Thermoplastic Polyurethane (TPU) Blend Based Foam."
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 71 (2014): 2219-234. Academic Search
Complete. Web.

[28]

[29] Song, J. H., R. J. Murphy, R. Narayan, and G. B. H. Davies.
"Biodegradable and Compostable Alternatives to Conventional Plastics."
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
364.1526 (2009): 2127-139. Web.[open
access](http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/364/1526/2127.short)

[30]