![](Brogans_MET_50.100.12a-b_CP4.jpg "fig:Brogans_MET_50.100.12a-b_CP4.jpg")
A **brogan** is a heavy, ankle-high [shoe](shoe "wikilink") or
[boot](boot "wikilink").

## History

Brogan-like shoes, called "brogues" (from Old Irish "br√≥c" meaning
"shoe"), were made and worn in Scotland and Ireland as early as the 16th
century, and the shoe-type probably originated there.[1][2] They were
used by the Scots and the Irish as work boots for wear in the wet, boggy
Scottish and Irish countryside.[3] The word "brogue" is still used in
Britain for a [style of dress shoe](Brogue_shoe "wikilink"), which may
or may not have an ankle high top.

Brogans and brogan-like shoes and boots were adopted over time by
various countries for wear by their military forces. English armies
issued ankle high boots at least as early as the [English Civil
War](English_Civil_War "wikilink"), and brogans may have been worn by
some soldiers among both American and British forces during the
[American Revolutionary War](American_Revolutionary_War "wikilink").[4]
Both sides in the American Civil War issued them to their soldiers, and
the U.S. Army issued hob-nailed brogans known as "trench boots" to U.S.
soldiers during the First World
War.![](Aa_hobnailedboots_01.jpg "fig:Aa_hobnailedboots_01.jpg") These
replaced the 1904 Russet Service Shoe, a brogan of a construction
unsuitable to trench warfare or field duty in general.[5] An improved
version of the trench boot, the 1918 trench boot, was nicknamed the
"little tanks" because of their strong construction, and "Pershing
boots" after American general [John J.
Pershing](John_J._Pershing "wikilink").[6][7] The U.S. Army continued to
issue brogans during WWII, and the U.S. Air Force issued them through
the 1960s.[8] Other armies, such as the German Army of the 1930s and
World War II, and the British Army, have also issued brogan-type shoes,
nicknamed "Ammunition Shoes".[9]

## Description

The early brogans of the Scots and Irish were made of heavy untanned
leather.[10] The development of civilian brogans follows the general
development of civilian footwear, with construction of brogan-style
shoes benefiting from improvements in other styles of shoe, and with
styles changing with the times.[11] From the 1820s until before the
American Civil War, American soldiers were issued brogans which were
made on straight lasts; there was no "left" or "right" and they shaped
themselves to the wearer's feet through use. These brogans were less
expensive to manufacture than paired shoes, but they were very
uncomfortable until broken in and often resulted in blisters. They were
replaced in 1858 with an improved version used until the 1880s,
generally known as Jeff Davis boots after Jefferson Davis, the Secretary
of War who re-equipped the army in the 1850s. Military brogans were
greatly improved during the First World War (see above), but at least in
the United States, the lessons learned in that war were forgotten, and
as World War II approached, the Army found itself reinventing the wheel,
starting out once again with a garrison shoe that was ill-suited to
field and combat duty. Modifications to brogans were unsuccessful, and
eventually abandoned in favor of higher topped combat boots.[12]

## See also

-   [Blundstone](Blundstone_Footwear "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] *Paul Revere's Ride* by David Hackett Fischer, p. 122

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12] The Technical Services, the Quartermaster Corps: Organization,
Supply and Services, pp 102 - 110, by Erna Risch, U.S. Army Center for
Military History