![](Charlie_Dunn_pictured_in_bootmaking_shop.jpg "fig:Charlie_Dunn_pictured_in_bootmaking_shop.jpg")![](Charliedunn2.jpg "fig:Charliedunn2.jpg")
**Charles Russell "Charlie" Dunn** (c. 1898 – September 23, 1993)[1] was
an American [bootmaker](bootmaker "wikilink") of handmade Western, or
[cowboy, boots](Cowboy_Boot "wikilink") for more than 80 years. Dubbed
the "[Michelangelo](Michelangelo "wikilink") of cowboy boots,"[2] he
first gained widespread notice in the wake of [Jerry Jeff
Walker](Jerry_Jeff_Walker "wikilink")'s song "Charlie Dunn" (1972). By
the time he retired in 1988 from Texas Traditions, his shop in Austin,
he routinely charged up to $3,000 for a pair of boots, had a waiting
list of hundreds of interested buyers willing to wait three years for
delivery, and had made boots for a long list of celebrities, including
[Arnold Palmer](Arnold_Palmer "wikilink"), [Mary Kay
Place](Mary_Kay_Place "wikilink"), [Gene Autry](Gene_Autry "wikilink"),
[Slim Pickens](Slim_Pickens "wikilink"), [Don F
Brooks](Don_Frank_Brooks "wikilink"), [Harry
Belafonte](Harry_Belafonte "wikilink"), [Ernest
Tubb](Ernest_Tubb "wikilink"), [Peter Fonda](Peter_Fonda "wikilink"),
and [Carole King](Carole_King "wikilink").[3]

Don Counts, who owned several pairs of Charlie's boots and lured him out
of a premature retirement, described Charlie as "a real character, an
elflike creature who captivated everybody."[4] Known for his colorful
language and broad sense of humor, Charlie in his customary black beret
and cobbler's apron measured out at 5'4" and 135 pounds of pure imp.[5]
One friend noted that even though he was "quiet-spoken," he could "tell
stories all day and all night."[6]

When Charlie died at 95 from complications arising from a
[stroke](stroke "wikilink"),[7] he had passed along his bootmaking
mastery to Lee Miller, his heir-designate, thus assuring the survival of
exceptional bootmaking in the traditional, handmade manner.[8] As with
four generations of Dunns before him, Charlie had persevered in and
prolonged the production of custom boots, despite the general trend
toward bootmaking in factories.[9] One of a handful of survivors of an
endangered species—the half artisan, half artist maker of once-common
items—Charlie managed, in passing his skills to a new generation, to
make sure that the world continued to enjoy prized bootmaking.

## Early life

Charlie was born September 19, 1898, on a
[riverboat](riverboat "wikilink") coursing the [White
River](White_River_(Arkansas) "wikilink"), "between two towns in
Arkansas," the third of ten children for Molly and Thomas Dunn. His
great-great grandfather, Winfield Scott Duam, made boots in [County
Cork, Ireland](County_Cork,_Ireland "wikilink"), starting a lineage of
[bootmakers](bootmaker "wikilink") that reached to young Charlie, five
generations. The name change to "Dunn" occurred "a few generations
later," presumably in the transition to the United States.[10] His
parents Molly and Thomas hailed from
[Tennessee](Tennessee "wikilink").[11]

At three, the family moved "in a [covered
wagon](covered_wagon "wikilink")" to [Texas](Texas "wikilink"), settling
in Glory, a tiny village outside [Paris](Paris,_Texas "wikilink"), a
town of 9,000 near the [Oklahoma](Oklahoma "wikilink") border about 100
miles northeast of [Dallas](Dallas "wikilink").[12] He attended the
local elementary school, though, he recalled, "mama taught us ten
children how to read and write and do our 'rithmetic before we even
started in school."[13] Charlie took his first paying job at six,
emptying [spittoons](spittoon "wikilink") for ten cents a week, but it
ended quickly.[14] By the next year he was working alongside his father
in the shop of Ed Lewis, a one-legged bootmaker.[15] The following year,
at age eight, Charlie moved in with Lewis in Paris because, he
explained, "I figured I could learn more from someone other than my
father." The move possibly was a sign of difficulties in their
relationship already.[16] He learned quickly, and produced his first
pair of custom boots when he was 11, a birthday present to himself.[17]
The Dunns, like the families of most bootmakers, moved frequently,
chasing steady work. Charlie remembered living briefly in several towns,
including Tyler, before spending three years in [Fort
Worth](Fort_Worth "wikilink"), where his father opened the Dunn Boot
Shop on the corner of Main and Exchange Streets.[18] The stockyards and
broader ranch culture provided likely customers for boots. In 1913 or
so, the Dunns moved in covered wagons to
[Arkansas](Arkansas "wikilink"), "to get away from the big city,"
Charlie recalled.[19]

## Early career

At fifteen, Charlie moved out after a dispute with his father about
money, possibly over Charlie's use of funds to purchase a suit, his
first.[20] His high school education apparently at an end—a later Census
Report notes that he had finished two years of high school—Charlie hit
the road.[21] The precise sequence of his stops as an itinerant
bootmaker during this period remains murky, but he settled briefly in
Newport County, AR, then shifted to Fort Smith, AR, where he worked for
a local bootmaker.[22] To recuperate from a bout with smallpox, he
convalesced under his mother's care, probably in
[Tyler](Tyler,_Texas "wikilink"), TX, for six months before striking out
on his own for good.[23] At some point, he spent time in Paris
again.[24] He also worked at Fort Sill, OK, for his first of many stints
as a bootmaker for the U.S. Army.[25] According to Charlie, "I never
stayed at a job after I felt I'd learned all I could from it. Sometimes
I'd leave after a week, but I was never without work."[26]

Charlie served in the Navy during [World War
I](World_War_I "wikilink").[27] Liking the way that the sailor's cap hid
his already balding pate, he began wearing a black beret when he was
discharged, and kept doing so the rest of his life.[28] His next stop
was [Memphis](Memphis,_Tennessee "wikilink"), where he studied art for a
couple of years and incorporated another lifelong, signature practice:
an emphasis on the anatomy of the foot in fitting boots. His art teacher
stressed the importance of the skeleton in making accurate depictions.
Charlie embraced this approach: "How can you make a portrait or paint a
face unless you know the bone structure underneath?"[29] To further his
understanding of anatomy, he soon earned a certification, probably by
mail, from [Dr. Scholl's School of
Podiatry](Dr._William_M._Scholl_College_of_Podiatric_Medicine "wikilink"),
an achievement to which he referred proudly the rest of his life.[30] He
used his profound knowledge of the foot structure to create a custom
"[last](last "wikilink")," or wooden model of the foot.

In Memphis Charlie courted and married 26-year-old Cecil ("Cecile")
Cleo. Their marriage lasted until her death in
[Austin](Austin "wikilink") in 1985. They eventually had four
children—Louise and sons Creighton, Tom, and Donald.[31]

Sometime after Memphis, Charlie for the first and only time sought work
in a boot [factory](factory "wikilink"). In
[Winnipeg](Winnipeg "wikilink"), [Manitoba](Manitoba "wikilink"),
[Canada](Canada "wikilink"), he took a job in the
[Stetson](Stetson "wikilink") shoe and boot factory. He explained why he
left soon after: "In a factory you do just one or two operations at the
most... And that's all you do. You make stitches or soles. You become a
part of that machine. And, you have just about as much individuality as
IT does." "From then on," he noted, "I never messed with workin' in a
factory."[32]

Peripatetic, as befit a bootmaker, Charlie traversed the continent down
to [San Antonio](San_Antonio "wikilink"), where, in 1933, he again
fashioned boots for the Army, this time at [Fort Sam
Houston](Fort_Sam_Houston "wikilink").[33] By decade's end, he was in
Austin, where he took a job at Lone Star Boots off Congress Ave.[34] He
lived on West 2nd St., a short distance from the store, in what is now
the heart of downtown Austin.[35] While working at Lone Star he made a
pair of boots with a unique design element: an intricate yellow rose
inlaid into the upper of the boot. He set the boots in the window,
hoping to attract a buyer. A short time later, [Ernest
Tubb](Ernest_Tubb "wikilink"), a seminal figure in western music, caught
notice and purchased the boots.[36] A legend was born. Once tempted to
turn to a career in art, he instead had decided to "take my love of art
and put it in bootmaking" after watching artists starving in the
[Depression](Great_Depression "wikilink"). For him, a boot was a
sculpture. Works from the 1940s demonstrate that he had achieved a
special marriage of art and craft.[37]

## Middle career

### Capitol Saddlery

Charlie finally settled down in 1949. For the next 25 years, he worked
at Capitol [Saddlery](Saddlery "wikilink") on Lavaca St. in central
Austin under the eye, and sometimes the thumb, of Thomas Casper "Buck"
Steiner, a legend for his rodeo skills, among others.[38] Capitol
Saddlery was already well known for its saddles and tack, marketing them
through [Montgomery Ward](Montgomery_Ward "wikilink")'s and
[Sears](Sears "wikilink") catalogs as well as to ranchers across Texas.
Charlie extended the tradition of excellence to footwear, principally
custom western boots. Though the same age, Steiner and Charlie literally
stood in contrast, big Steiner towering over the "bantam rooster." Their
personalities contrasted sharply, too: Steiner hard, gruff, and with a
colorful past, befitting his [Rodeo Hall of
Fame](National_Cowboy_&_Western_Heritage_Museum "wikilink") image;
Charlie, elf-like, mischievous, a talker, and family man. Yet, out of
need and mutual respect for excellence, they managed to work together
for a long time.

By the 1960s, Charlie's boots were well known—and expensive. His custom
boots routinely sold for $500 to more than $1,000 in today's
dollars.[39] An incident from the early-1960s highlights both the value
of Charlie's creations and the tension between Charlie and Steiner.
Vice-president [Lyndon Johnson](Lyndon_Johnson "wikilink") wanted a pair
of Charlie's boots and sent Sam Houston Johnson, his brother, to get
Charlie to come to the courthouse to fit him because he was, according
to Charlie's account, "sort of tied up." After being "checked out by the
[FBI](FBI "wikilink") and all," Charlie started out the door to take the
measurements. Steiner stopped him, saying, "I wasn't going to do any
such thing. He said if Lyndon Johnson wanted his measure taken, he could
come over to the saddlery like everybody else." When an interviewer
asked if Steiner forbade the trip because he was a Republican, Charlie
retorted, "Hell, he wasn't any Republican. He was a damn fool." Charlie
never made a pair of boots for LBJ.[40]

The market for custom cowboy boots, anything construed as "cowboy"
really—from turquoise jewelry to five-window Fords—grew dramatically in
the 1970s with the rise of the "cosmic cowboy," "[progressive
country](progressive_country "wikilink")," and "[outlaw
music](Outlaw_country "wikilink")" culture centered in Austin. Together
with the sharp rise in disposable income from "cowboy capitalism" in the
black market, the Austin music scene generated high demand for Charlie's
boots. [Jerry Jeff Walker](Jerry_Jeff_Walker "wikilink")'s "Charlie
Dunn" (1972) both reflected this trend and accelerated it. Besides a
paean to Charlie's artistry and skill, Walker describes sources of
conflict apparent to any visitor:

After the song's release, prices soared into the thousands, though
[Porter Wagoner](Porter_Wagoner "wikilink")'s diamond-encrusted pair
fetched $25,000![41] And with Charlie's growing popularity came
Steiner's deepening resentment. One observer noted, "When Charlie began
to attract some publicity... the boss got jealous and a bad situation
developed between them."[42] While Steiner was "countin' his gold" and
buying ranches in the Austin area, Charlie built boots for $3.25 an
hour. In 1974, Charlie asked Steiner for a 5¢ per hour raise. Steiner
refused, and Charlie quit. Though he had threatened to retire several
times before, this time he left for good, but not before, legend has it,
he dismantled the wooden lasts created for thousands of customers,
rendering them useless. It was, according to one observer, Charlie's way
of "getting back" at Steiner.[43] At 75, after 25 years at Capitol
Saddlery, Charlie retired. When asked whether he had been treated fairly
there, Charlie replied, "About as fairly as anyone else around there
was, I suppose."[44]

### First retirement

He and Cecile moved almost immediately to
[Mesquite](Mesquite,_Texas "wikilink"), a few miles east of Dallas, to
be near Louise Rountree, his only daughter, and her family. Ever
mischievous, Charlie claims that she "lured him" there against his will,
when all he wanted was to retire and "do a little
[gardening](gardening "wikilink")."[45] Many of his loyal customers had
other ideas. Charlie recounts that "I just couldn't get a night's rest"
after retiring to Mesquite. "People were calling me at all hours, from
all over, beggin' for boots, sayin' they couldn't get a good fit any
more, and calling me a 'living legend.' I just had to start up
again."[46]

## Return to bootmaking

<img src="Charlie_Dunn_1977.jpg" title="fig:Charlie_Dunn_1977.jpg" width="200" alt="Charlie_Dunn_1977.jpg" />
Don Counts, Austin physician to the music community, was one of the many
who had come to depend on Charlie to fit him properly when no one else
ever had. But unlike the many who made that claim, Counts saw not just a
bootmaker, but a "dying art form moving to Mesquite."[47] Charlie knew
the stakes, too: "Bootmaking is an art that's going to be lost before
too long."[48] Counts vowed to talk Charlie into returning to Austin to
make boots—"I had to get him back" —and did.[49]

Counts's astute awareness of Charlie's historical and cultural
importance—beyond his artistry and skill—is not surprising. He worked
tirelessly and often without pay for the musicians who played at the
[Armadillo World Headquarters](Armadillo_World_Headquarters "wikilink")
and Antone's Nightclub, among other Austin venues. From the 1970s
onward, Austin musicians, and many others from across the country, knew
him as a medical source who met their needs in an affordable manner. His
many clients who could pay—and several well-known musicians counted him
as their personal physician—counted on him to work with their difficult
and far-flung schedules. After decades of helping musicians, he served
as a consultant to the founding board of the Health Alliance of Austin
Musicians (HAAM), which seeks to provide affordable health care for
musicians without insurance. Thus, just as he recognized the critical
value in keeping alive, literally, the blues of [Jimmy
Reed](Jimmy_Reed "wikilink") or [James Cotton](James_Cotton "wikilink"),
so, too, did he recognize that preserving Charlie's bootmaking was
preserving a vanishing cultural practice.

Counts, as most folks did, had fallen under the spell of the impish
cobbler, too, so the business and cultural interests were inextricably
woven together with the personal. The atmosphere from the beginning was
less like a business than like a close-knit family, complete with
resentments and arguments and, eventually, reconciliation between
Charlie, staff, manager, and owner.[50] Carrlyn Short, soon to be Lee
Miller's wife, played perhaps the crucial role in establishing an
efficient, productive, and harmonious environment in which several
strong, artistic personalities vied for expression.

Joining Counts in the quest to bring Charlie back to Austin was Steve
Wiener, 24 years old at the time, a recent [University of
Texas](University_of_Texas "wikilink") graduate, and a
[guitar](guitar "wikilink") player in the Austin scene. He knew Charlie
from going to Capitol Saddlery, "just to hang out, " after buying his
first boots there in the early 1970s. Wiener went to the shop about
every six months, ostensibly to check the hides in stock, but just as
much to chat with Charlie, for whom he was developing deep respect and
affection. When Counts, a close friend, asked Wiener to be partners in
bringing Charlie out of retirement, Wiener quickly agreed. He served as
on-site manager of the new concern and handled publicity for the next 3
½ years.[51]

Counts presented Charlie with a deal: Charlie would have his own shop,
with [apprentices](apprentice "wikilink") to teach and direct; a salary
equal to three times what he had earned under Buck Steiner; free
[medical care](medical_care "wikilink") for Cecile and him; two weeks
paid [vacation](vacation "wikilink"); two weeks sick leave; and a place
to live.[52] Skeptical, Charlie resisted: "At first I told \[Counts and
Weiner\] no. I told them I was not interested in managing a place" or
"hav\[ing\] my name on a bank note. " Counts, who later secured a
$10,000 loan to finance the project, assured Charlie that we would be
free to make boots, not payrolls.[53] Charlie relented: "They said they
would take care of that \[business\] end... I said that would suit me
all right. "[54]

Charlie's new shop opened as "Texas Traditions" in September 1977 on
College Ave. off South Congress, where it remains today. A renovated
bungalow in front was Charlie and Cecile's residence, and a converted
garage held the shop and office.[55] Why did Charlie agree? The money?
No, that had never driven him to excel. Rather, Charlie knew that
"Bootmaking is an art that's gonna be lost before too long."[56] Indeed,
other legendary Texas bootmaking
outfits—[Lucchese](Lucchese_Boot_Company "wikilink"),
[Justin](Justin_Boots "wikilink"), [Nocona](Nocona_Boots "wikilink"),
and [Tony Lama](Tony_Lama_Boots "wikilink")—had long since "gone
[factory](factory "wikilink")" or in other cases, disappeared.
Customers—former and potential—knew it: more than 50 clamored to have
Charlie tend to them if he started back.[57]

More importantly, Charlie knew that for the tradition to endure he had
to pass along what he had learned from his 70+ years of bootmaking: "I
want to work and teach as many young men as I can so I can leave
something behind besides cold marble. I'd rather leave someone behind
who'd do it my way. "[58] Counts and Wiener understood this critical
part, too: Besides committing to financing and managing the new shop,
respectively, they actively recruited top prospects from [Oklahoma
State](Oklahoma_State_University_System "wikilink")'s bootmaking school
to serve under Charlie. Hopeful apprentices recognized the opportunity:
They applied from all over the country and across the Atlantic. The
experience of one apprentice who soon joined Charlie at Texas
Traditions, Lee Miller, exemplifies the process that Charlie and his
backers understood.

At 18 Miller began a two-year apprenticeship in a shoe repair shop in
his native [Vermont](Vermont "wikilink"). Already dedicating himself to
a career making boots, Miller was about to have an epiphany. One day a
friend brought by a [cassette tape](cassette_tape "wikilink") of Jerry
Jeff Walker's "Charlie Dunn, " the song that had brought Charlie's
expertise to a popular audience. After listening to the song in his
friend's van, Miller exclaimed, "That's what I want to do!" –make boots
with Charlie Dunn, that is, "though I'll never be famous, " he thought.
"That music did it. It was my inspiration" to work with Charlie.[59]
Though he never had seen a pair of Charlie's boots, the idea stayed with
him as he headed off to [Oklahoma
State](Oklahoma_State_University_System "wikilink")'s bootmaking school.
After graduation, he bounced out to [Utah](Utah "wikilink") to work with
a bootmaker there.[60] Meanwhile, Weiner and Counts encouraged Steve
Martin, one of the original apprentices at Texas Traditions, to recruit
the best bootmaker apprentice he could think of, and Martin gave them
the name of Miller, the "[valedictorian](valedictorian "wikilink")" of
the school, in Wiener's telling. They finally reached Miller in Utah
after a four-month search. The search took so long, in part, because
Miller had no phone service in Utah.[61]

As Lee Miller, later Charlie's designated heir puts it, "I wasn't sure
about moving to Texas—but to work with Charlie Dunn was the opportunity
of a lifetime for a young guy who wanted to make boots... \[but\]
\[w\]hen I got to Austin and saw the way Charlie made boots, I knew I
had to start all over... as Charlie's
[apprentice](apprentice "wikilink")."[62] Simply put, "The minute I
walked in the doors I knew it's where I wanted to be. The work they were
doing here was like nothing I'd ever seen before."[63]

## The Charlie Dunn method

### Fit

Ask the thousands of owners of Charlie's boots what make them special,
and the constant among the many reasons offered is, "Because of the
fit." To achieve the fit, Charlie took accurate, extensive measurements,
then built a boot that held them.

Charlie preferred to make measurements in person. "Feet are like
fingerprints," Charlie explained. "None are the same." A prospective
client was ordered to "just stand naturally" in his or her sock feet,
while Charlie drew with his blue pencil on a manila sheet, around and
beneath each foot, all the while asking about how they would be used—to
ride? dance? stroll?—and other relevant facts. He also probed and worked
his [double-jointed](double-jointed "wikilink") hands around and over
each foot, making notations and marks on the diagrams. He described the
process of getting the right six measurements: "I take a double diagram,
and I take notes on every little blood vessel and everything else. It
takes about 10 minutes. I don't even have to see what I'm doing. My
hands are so sensitive—just like a
[safecracker](safecracker "wikilink")'s hands—I can feel
[tendons](tendons "wikilink") right through socks and
[veins](veins "wikilink") and [joints](joints "wikilink") and
[calluses](calluses "wikilink")."[64] He knew that to achieve the
perfect fit, the boots must conform to that individual's idiosyncratic
shape by making certain there was no "pressure on the blood vessels or
the tendons, otherwise 'misery' and \[the\] foot falls asleep." "I've
got to know your [bunions](bunions "wikilink"),
[corns](corn_(medicine) "wikilink"), and [calluses](calluses "wikilink")
to do it right," he claimed.[65]

Until the 1940s, Charlie had measured clients' feet without socks on
them, but the Texas legislature intervened. As Charlie recounted in the
late 1970s, "\[Now\] you can't take your [sock](sock "wikilink") off in
my presence. The [podiatrists](podiatrists "wikilink") got nervous about
the bootmakers taking their business away, so about 30 years ago they
passed a law in the Texas legislature that said you got to keep your
socks on in here. They were just afraid of the boot-making profession. I
called their hand on that one. I let 'em know that if I had no more
faith in my trade than they had in theirs, I'd go out and dig ditches. I
recommended they do the same."[66] Ever the one to point out nonsense,
Charlie persevered to overcome this obstacle.

Once he had the measurements, down to the last vein and callous, Charlie
translated them to wooden [lasts](last "wikilink"), foot-shaped wooden
blocks. He shaped the lasts to conform to measurements by building up
sections with leather strips and shaving away other areas with a scalpel
knife. Charlie carefully shaped the last, explaining, "The whole thing
is built around the arch."[67] Not surprisingly, he used lasts of his
own design (Model 100), and had them imported from
[Mexico](Mexico "wikilink"), changing from Mexican ash to
[mesquite](mesquite "wikilink") over time.[68] The last generally served
for seven years before being remade: "Our feet change all the time," he
said. "If the customer gains—or loses—as much as 25 pounds, he must come
in so I can take a new set of measurements for a new last."[69] Charlie
was particularly protective about his measurements and lasts: "There are
some things I do that I won't even talk about because I don't want other
bootmakers to know how it's done."[70] In an oft-repeated pronouncement,
Charlie summed up the importance of the last: "In bootmaking, the
[last](last "wikilink") comes first." [71]

Occasionally, Charlie made boots without the opportunity to take
measurements personally. He agreed to make [Harry
Belafonte](Harry_Belafonte "wikilink") a pair, but only if Belafonte
made sure that the one taking measurements followed Charlie's
"diagrammed instructions" exactly; Belafonte did as told, and loved the
boots Charlie produced.[72] In another case, an [orthopedic
surgeon](Orthopedic_surgery "wikilink") could not come to Austin for a
fitting. Charlie reluctantly agreed to work with him, but demanded
[x-rays](x-rays "wikilink"), explaining " I want to see the bone
structure."[73] The emphasis on anatomy his art instructor instilled
clearly took hold in Charlie. When he received the x-rays, Charlie saw
the man's toes "just doubled up" on themselves. Upon receiving the
finished boots, the client said "it was the first time in his life he
ever had comfort in his feet," Charlie recalled.[74] From Deacon
Proudfoot, a [Hells Angels](Hells_Angels "wikilink") president with no
toes on his left foot, to Texas literary legend [J. Frank
Dobie](J._Frank_Dobie "wikilink"), with two [club
feet](club_foot "wikilink") – the only time Charlie, in a "life of
bootmaking," had seen "double [Lord Byrons](Lord_Byrons "wikilink")," in
Charlie's memorable description—people walked better with "Charlies" on
their feet.[75]

Tales of Charlie's works actually correcting foot problems abound. In
one case, a pair of his boots "actually relieved a [bone
spur](bone_spur "wikilink") on a man's heel. Within a month after
putting my boots on that fellow's bone spur had disappeared. Orthopedic
surgeon wanted to operate. No need to after he put my boots on." Another
man, "missing the front part of his foot" from dropping heavy machinery
on it, asked Charlie to make him some boots. "He walked into the shop
with a [cane](Walking_stick "wikilink") and put my boots on. When he
left, he didn't need the cane anymore." As usual, Charlie had an answer:
"I can fit 'em like a lot of 'em can't." [76]

### Construction

<img src="Dunn&#39;s_stitching_closeup.jpg" title="fig:Dunn&#39;s_stitching_closeup.jpg" width="200" alt="Dunn&#39;s_stitching_closeup.jpg" />
For the fit to last, so to speak, the boot had to hold the shape. In the
construction of the boot itself, as with the construction of the last,
Charlie had some secrets. He drew on a lifetime of incorporating ideas
and practices from the dozens of bootmakers with whom he worked and his
own, constant effort to improve his practices. By the 1970s, something
like a Charlie Dunn "code" for bootmaking had taken shape. Put simply,
he made boots the old-fashioned way, never trying something new unless
it improved the boot, and sometimes not even then, for he preferred the
traditional way. This "code" had practices that were not negotiable for
Charlie. The boot must have hard maple, not plastic or metal, pegs in
securing various elements. He insisted on spinning his own
[flax](flax "wikilink") [threads](threads "wikilink") for stitching and
binding, though doing so took a long time to perfect and was expensive.
[Nylon](Nylon "wikilink") thread, though sometimes more durable, was
never used. Though almost every other bootmaker, including custom
fitters, used plastic toe boxes as inserts to shape the toe of the boot,
Charlie insisted on shaping them exclusively with leather boxes because
they were tougher, could be built in almost any appropriate shape, and
retained the tradition of bootmaking by hand. Where leather joined to
leather, he skived, or thinned, both pieces to obtain a smoother, less
abrasive [seam](seam_(sewing) "wikilink"), one that not only felt better
to the wearer but also retained the lines of the boot. To provide
support for the foot of the boot, Charlie used only iron spikes pounded
flat by his hammer of 70+ years on his [anvil](anvil "wikilink") affixed
to a tree stump. For small men and women, he used a 40-penny spike; for
larger men, he used a 60-penny spike, about six inches long and
half-inch wide, known as a "bridge timber spike."[77] And "The
[sole](sole_(shoe) "wikilink") \[has\] got to be leather and got to be
thick leather," and that's the way it was, for Charlie. These and other
elements defined the Charlie Dunn "code" of making boots that had passed
through the centuries of bootmaking, refined in his hands and on shop
machines nearly as old as he was.

Charlie developed a method that respected bootmaker, boot, and client.
While some elements of bootmaking came under "the code" and did not
change, other practices did: He was constantly working to improve his
boots. As cocksure as he was about his method, he was humble about the
results in one respect: "Never was a pair of boots that couldn't have
been made better," he often observed.[78] SH Respecting the process of
bootmaking itself, he noted, "I make a pair of boots, and the next time
I try to make 'em a little better. I'll never reach perfection, but I
have a hell of a \[good\] time trying."[79] One way he kept trying to
make them better was to listen to and watch bootmakers he respected.
Charlie's long-time apprentice and eventual heir, Lee Miller, explained
that while Charlie could draw the line at innovation and command "A boot
has to be made like this," he also was "open, encouraging," and able to
concede to changes if, and it always was a "big if" with Charlie, the
suggestion improved the boot in the context of traditional
bootmaking.[80] A change in his use of hides illustrates Charlie's
ability to recognize a better way of making custom boots.

For most of his lifetime of making boots, Charlie tried to get as many
pairs of boots from a single hide as possible. After all, he had spent
the better part of a century as an itinerant bootmaker, with limited
access to hides, or working for budget-conscious owners, such as Buck
Steiner, or for budget-minded clients, such as the Army, so the "old
way" of using every square inch of a hide made sense—if he wanted to
keep his job or sell his boots. And, for most of his career, Charlie had
made working boots, not "fancy" boots. Miller, however, followed the old
bootmaking saying of "No tits, tales, or assholes," that is, of avoiding
the thinner, weaker, less attractive portions of the hide, because these
parts were more likely to tear or stretch, and detracted from the
appearance, as well. For the very expensive boots that Charlie made the
last decade of his life, Miller argued that only the best portions of
the hides should be used. At various times at Texas Traditions, one or
the other, or both, men threatened to quit over the issue. At one point,
Charlie folded his [apron](apron "wikilink"), set it on the workbench,
and announced he was through. After a period inside the house, he
returned to the shop, put on his apron, and resumed work. He was wrong,
he admitted, and knew a better idea when he heard it.[81]

The classic conflict and resolution between master and apprentice has
occurred countless times in history in every field of human endeavor—how
did [Bach](Johann_Sebastian_Bach "wikilink")'s or
[Michelangelo](Michelangelo "wikilink")'s or [Louis
Armstong](Louis_Armstong "wikilink")'s followers adhere to tradition,
only to reinterpret it "faithfully"? How and when and to whom to pass
the torch involves conflict, negotiation, and, eventually, a "new"
tradition. So it was with Charlie and Lee Miller, in this and many other
cases, as Charlie entrusted Miller with greater and greater
responsibility for production. True, says Miller, "Charlie was kind of
hands off. He expected you to do your work, which allowed me to
flourish." There was, however, "never any doubt that \[the shop\] was
Charlie's" and that it ultimately was "not a group effort... it was a
Charlie Dunn boot."[82]

Charlie made boots the best way he knew how—not the fastest (a pair
required at least twenty hours, sometimes double, of "hand time," not
counting fitting, curing, drying, and other pauses in the process); not
the cheapest ([nylon](nylon "wikilink"), [plastic](plastic "wikilink"),
and [rubber](rubber "wikilink") cost less); and not the easiest (leather
toe boxes and hand-spun flax thread took time and skill). The result? "A
[horse](horse "wikilink") can step on my boots and they won't break
down." [83]

Charlie offered perfect fit and flawless construction to preserve that
fit. But Charlie offered still more in his boots: unique designs of his
or the client's choosing expertly integrated into the boot. With
Charlie's boots, not just the fit was the owner's alone, so, too, was
the design.

### Design

<img src="Dunn&#39;s_cactus_design.jpg" title="fig:Dunn&#39;s_cactus_design.jpg" width="150" alt="Dunn&#39;s_cactus_design.jpg" />
Almost any design imaginable appears on a Charlie boot—[oil
derricks](oil_derrick "wikilink"), animals, names, initials, logos,
scenes, just about everything was sketched and worked into the upper
and, less frequently, the lower foot. Charlie's signature design, dating
to the pair he built "on spec" that [Ernest
Tubb](Ernest_Tubb "wikilink") bought, was the inlaid
[rose](rose "wikilink"). It began, as did all of his creations, with a
detailed sketch. He liked to work from life, so he used actual roses to
inspire his design, and Charlie's immense artistic skill allowed the
design to bloom. Drawing an intricate rose the size of a quarter is one
thing; figuring how to create it out of leather, in-lay it in proportion
on the boot, was quite another. So difficult and unique was this design,
Charlie kept the process secret for decades, until he passed along the
secrets to Miller.[84]
<img src="Dunn&#39;s_rose_design,_two_colors.jpg" title="fig:Dunn&#39;s_rose_design,_two_colors.jpg" width="150" alt="Dunn&#39;s_rose_design,_two_colors.jpg" />
![](Dunn's_yellow_rose_design.jpg "fig:Dunn's_yellow_rose_design.jpg")
One client asked for [bluebonnets](bluebonnets "wikilink") to adorn his
uppers, but Charlie hesitated because he didn't have one on hand to
study. The client, a "real honest man" according to Charlie, soon showed
up with the flower, a move that horrified him because he believed, as
did most Texans, that it was illegal to pick the state flower![85] "I
have to use a real bluebonnet or rose as my model," Charlie noted. "The
bluebonnets and [Indian paintbrushes](Castilleja "wikilink") only bloom
outside in the [spring](spring_(season) "wikilink"), but I have a source
that will give them to me all year 'round. A color photograph just isn't
enough to help me capture them on leather."[86] Whenever possible,
Charlie, the artist, drew inspiration from the thing itself. Sometimes,
however, he did not.

"One of my most popular motifs," recalled Charlie, was a
[marijuana](marijuana "wikilink") leaf. While he agreed it "makes a
beautiful design," in this rare instance a picture would do—"don't send
samples, thank you."[87] Presumably the same warning held for the
"magic" [mushrooms](mushrooms "wikilink") and
[peyote](peyote "wikilink") buttons that graced others' boots.[88]

The most common motifs were the wearers' name or initials. Charlie
teased, at $20 per letter (in 1977), "that's just cheap insurance
against getting' 'em stolen."[89] SL Charlie liked to make fancy or
unusual designs "\[b\]ecause a lot of people can't make 'em like that,"
just as he liked to make boots for people "who say they can't be fit."
His supreme confidence in fitting anybody carried over to his making of
designs: "most other boot makers won't work" with initials or names or
designs "because they're afraid they won't fit and they'll be stuck with
them."[90] Charlie refused payment for any boots that didn't fit, a
rarity affecting only a handful of the thousands of pairs during his
last decade of bootmaking.[91] He adorned fearlessly.
![](Dunn's_mirror_image_text.jpg "fig:Dunn's_mirror_image_text.jpg") As
Charlie's boots grew in popularity and expense, the palette and variety
of exotic skins increased, too: [ostrich](ostrich "wikilink"),
[anteater](anteater "wikilink"), [shark](shark "wikilink"),
[alligator](alligator "wikilink"), [sting ray](sting_ray "wikilink"),
and others, in addition to the traditional [calf](calf "wikilink"),
[snake](snake "wikilink"), [lizard](lizard "wikilink"), and
[bull](bull "wikilink") hides in a rainbow of hues. Charlie's favorite
hide was [kangaroo](kangaroo "wikilink"), because of its combination of
strength and pliability, and his least favorite were shark and
[crocodile](crocodile "wikilink"), with "skin as unpredictable as they
were alive. You never know when it's going to break or give way," he
explained.[92] No matter how colorful or exotic the hide, regardless of
the amount or type of designs, Charlie stayed true to his goal: "If you
can't fit people, no matter how beautiful the boot is, no matter how
exotic the leather, it ain't worth a damn."[93]

In 1983 Charlie recorded a video showing the making of his kind of boot,
explaining the process step-by-step. He shows the skiving, stitching,
last-preparing, toe-boxing, and other features that make boots by him or
those he taught so prized.[94]

## The Charlie Dunn legend

Jerry Jeff Walker's song "Charlie Dunn" and the rise of the Austin music
and counterculture scenes formed the first wave of Charlie's national
prominence. A backlog of interest from his three-year retirement and an
escalation in regional contraband profits backed his second wave of
popularity. When he opened Texas Traditions, the first customer was
[Peter Fonda](Peter_Fonda "wikilink"), followed quickly by a member of
the [Grateful Dead](Grateful_Dead "wikilink"). Others who were lucky
enough to be measured could wait several months for delivery, though the
shop produced three or four pairs every week.[95] Potential clients
tried to bribe their way up the waiting list, offering as much as $500
in cash or even more in contraband.[96] Demand became even more surreal
with the release of "[Urban Cowboy](Urban_Cowboy "wikilink")" (1980):
Boot orders were backed up for a year, with more than 200 potential
customers wanting the chance to wait 2 ½ years to be measured, though no
new names were accepted for the waiting list.[97] The price for a
non-exotic pair had soared to $1000. "The high price was really more to
discourage orders!" given the backlog, explained Miller.[98]

If Charlie two-stepped to prominence with Jerry Jeff Walker's song, he
now rode to mythic status with the urban cowboys. He was featured in
national media, such as the TV shows "[Good Morning
America](Good_Morning_America "wikilink")" and "[Lifestyles of the Rich
and Famous](Lifestyles_of_the_Rich_and_Famous "wikilink")," and
magazines such as "[Travel & Leisure](Travel_&_Leisure "wikilink")" and
"[Us](Us_Weekley "wikilink")."[99] Even the increasingly reclusive
[Elizabeth Taylor](Elizabeth_Taylor "wikilink") sought his boots,
writing by hand, "To Charlie. I need a pair of your beautiful boots. See
you soon. Elizabeth Taylor."[100] Charlie waited a year for her to come
by, then lamented, "I wouldn't mind measuring her for hip boots. But any
lady that would keep an 84-year-old man in suspense that long, I just
don't know... There oughta be a law."[101] He was known around the
world, and probably had become the best-known maker of western boots the
world has ever seen. For all the attention, however, Charlie remained
humble about his artistry:

## Final retirement

![](Lee_Miller,_Charlie_Dunn,_Don_Counts.jpg "fig:Lee_Miller,_Charlie_Dunn,_Don_Counts.jpg")
Charlie retired from Texas Traditions, the shop he ran, on his 88th
birthday, nine years almost to the day after he came out of his first
retirement. He continued to live in the bungalow in front of the shop.
When asked what he would say to someone asking if he would consider
coming out of retirement a second time, Charlie snorted, "First I'll
insult, then I'll shoot, them."[102] Charlie had built up Texas
Traditions since he started it, but did not own it. Don Counts, local
physician and financial backer who had brought Charlie out of
retirement, sold the business to Carrlyn and Lee Miller, though Counts
retained the property.[103] Miller received 3000 patterns, mostly of
Charlie's designs, all of the ancient machinery, hides, and the immense
good will created there.[104] In return, Counts asked Miller to maintain
the physical property, pay the taxes, and, most important to Counts and
countless thousands since, to "carry on the tradition." Miller and
Counts concluded the arrangements with a handshake.[105] On his 90th
birthday Charlie received several remarkable presents. The city of
Austin declared September 19, 1977, "Charlie Dunn Day," noting that his
"reputation for quality, perfect fit, and originality of design drew
customers from all over the country."[106] Also, for the first time his
works were exhibited publicly in two venerable venues, Wylie's, the
longest running bar on Austin's infamous [6th
Street](Sixth_Street_(Austin,_Texas) "wikilink"), and Clarksville Café,
which stood in wealthy West Austin and the neighborhood of its former
African-American servants. The exhibitions, titled "Texas Roots, Texas
Boots," lasted for a month and featured boots from the 1940s forward.
Further, Charlie was featured on a local public television program and
in the local print media, as well.[107]

Charlie soon moved to Thunderbird Lake outside
[Smithville](Smithville,_Texas "wikilink"), a small community an hour
east of Austin. There he lived peaceably with a companion until he died
from complications from a [stroke](stroke "wikilink") on September 23,
1993.[108] Charlie, 95, had made boots his entire life, save the first
and last seven years of it.

Obituaries appeared nationwide via the AP wire. *[The New York
Times](The_New_York_Times "wikilink")* noted that Charlie, "whose
custom-made boots cost up to $3,000 and became a status symbol, rose to
fame as a boot maker when Austin's music scene caught the nation's
attention in the 1970's."[109] It failed to mention his longevity as a
bootmaker. He was buried in black kangaroo boots with six rows of
multicolored stitching made. Miller, his heir, remembered, "I made them
for him in 1991, and he said they were his favorites. He told me he
liked them so much, he slept in them."[110] At the funeral, Don
Rountree, his grandson, and Lee Miller sang "Charlie Dunn" as Charlie
was lowered into the grave. Many loyal clients gathered at his favorite
restaurant afterward to swap stories and pay homage by wearing boots he
had built.[111]

## Legacies

<img src="Charlie_Dunn_making_boots.jpg" title="fig:Charlie_Dunn_making_boots.jpg" width="200" alt="Charlie_Dunn_making_boots.jpg" />
Charlie had passed along to Lee Miller his most treasured secrets,
including how to inlay the rose design, as well as his thousands of
designs and lasts. Miller retained as the "tops man" Maximiliano ("Max")
Fernandez, who had joined the shop during Charlie's watch. Miller has
taken in apprentices and an intern, continuing the practice that brought
him into Texas Traditions in the late 1970s. Commenting on the
incredible unlikelihood of Charlie Dunn-style bootmaking still thriving
in the 21st century, one apprentice remarked, "People don't do this
anymore. In bootmaking you have to be lucky enough to find someone to
teach you." She observed that the bootmakers coming in the wake of
Charlie "have a legacy, and Lee \[Miller\] passes that down" to those he
trains, just as he was trained.[112] Miller explains, simply, that "You
have to give back. And this is our giving back."[113] Miller, Charlie's
onetime apprentice, made the boots Charlie was buried in, his
favorites.[114]

When Don Counts sold Texas Traditions to Lee and Carrlyn Miller upon
Charlie's retirement, he had only one condition: Miller had to agree to
carry on the tradition of bootmaking taught him by Charlie. After all,
Counts saw Texas Traditions as his own legacy, his vision brought to
fruition, of preserving the Texas tradition of crafting hand-made
boots.[115] The thousands for whom Charlie made his exquisite
"functional art" and hundreds more walking in his heir Miller's heritage
creations and thousands yet to come, all can find comfort that the
circle has not been broken, that in one small but important way, the
18th century has survived into the 21st.[116]

## References

[Category:1898 births](Category:1898_births "wikilink") [Category:1993
deaths](Category:1993_deaths "wikilink") [Category:American fashion
designers](Category:American_fashion_designers "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:People from Bastrop County,
Texas](Category:People_from_Bastrop_County,_Texas "wikilink")

[1] U.S Census Records for Batesville, County, AR, list Charlie as one
year old in 1900. His tombstone gives his birth date as September 19,
1898. Apparently the census was taken before his second birthday in
1900. Sources occasionally mistake his birth year as 1895, e. g.,
obituary, Austin *American-Statesman* (?), September, 24, 25, or 26,
1993.

[2] *Travel & Leisure*, November, 1988, 244.

[3] Obituary, *New York Times*, September 25, 1993.

[4] Obituary, September 25, 1993, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*. For the
role of Counts in bringing Charlie out of retirement, see Morris, 32,
and below.

[5] Obituary, September 25, 1993, Dallas *Morning News*.

[6] Robyn Turner quoted in Art Chapman, Obituary of Charlie Dunn, Fort
Worth *Star-Telegram* September 28, 1993, 12A.

[7] Obituary, September 25, 1993, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*.

[8] Michael Wallis, *Philip Morris Magazine*, November–December 1989,
32.

[9] Larry Skloss, "The Best Boots in the World?" *Gentry Magazine,
Austin Citizen*, Vol. 1, No. 5, March 29, 1978.

[10] Larry Skloss, "The Best Boots in the World?" *Gentry Magazine,
Austin Citizen*, Vol. 1, No. 5, March 29, 1978

[11] Pete Szilagyi, Charlie Dunn Obituary, Austin *American-Statesman*,
September 28, 1993. Title, date

[12] Art Chapman, Obituary of Charlie Dunn, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*
September 28, 1993 11A.

[13] Robyn Turner, *Austin Originals: Chats with Colorful Characters*
Amarillo, TX: Paramount Publishing, 1982, ?.

[14] *Southern Living*, n.d., 178.

[15] "Texas Craftsman: Keeper of a Dying Flame," *Texas Home*, June
1980.

[16] Yvonne Saliba, Dallas *Times-Herald*, April 17, 1977.

[17] "The Changeout Times," Exhibits Department Publication of the Bob
Bullock Texas State History Museum, Vol. IV, Issue XIV, July 23, 2010.

[18] Charlie recalls moving with his family to Ft. Worth in 1911, and
that he was nine years old: accepting that he was born in 1898, the
claims cannot both be accurate. It seems likely that he landed in Ft.
Worth after Paris, if only because he frequently refers to making his
first pair of boots in Paris, at age eight. FWST82; DTH

[19] Yvonne Saliba, Dallas *Times-Herald*, April 17, 1977, 6.

[20]

[21] U.S Census for San Antonio, 1935.

[22] Steve Schlegel, "Charlie Dunn: A Legend in Leather," *Texas
Historian*, November 1979, 1; Yvonne Saliba, Dallas *Times-Herald*,
April 17, 1977, 6.

[23] *Bastrop County Times*, June 1, 1989, A15.

[24]

[25] *Bastrop County Times*, June 1, 1989, A16.

[26]

[27]

[28] Larry Skloss, "The Best Boots in the World?" Gentry Magazine,
Austin Citizen, Vol. 1, No. 5, March 29, 1978.

[29] Carolyn Poirot Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*, May 10, 1982, 2B.

[30] According to Lee Miller, his heir-designate, he sometimes showed
the "certificate" of completion of the course well into his 80s; LM. The
school was founded in 1912 in Chicago to train podiatrists; [Dr. William
M. Scholl College of Podiatric
Medicine](Dr._William_M._Scholl_College_of_Podiatric_Medicine "wikilink")
; accessed April 14, 2013.

[31] Obituary, Dallas *Morning News*, September 25, 1993.

[32] Robyn Turner, *Austin Originals: Chats with Colorful Characters*
Amarillo, TX: Paramount Publishing, 1982, 24.

[33] The U.S. Census 1935 lists his occupation as "shoemaker"; Mayor Lee
Cooke, City of Austin Proclamation setting Charlie Dunn Day, September
19, 1988.

[34]

[35] The U.S. Census 1940 lists his home at 303 W 2nd.

[36]

[37] "Time Out" section, Austin *American-Statesman*, September 10,
1988.

[38] Stephanie M. Salazar, ["STEINER, THOMAS CASPER
\[STEINER](http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/fstdp)"\]
Handbook of Texas Online, accessed April 13, 2013. Published by the
Texas State Historical Association.

[39] Pete Szilagyi, obituary of Charlie Dunn, Austin
*American-Statesman*, September 28, 1993. B1.

[40] Steve Hannah, Milwaukee *Journal*, n.d. \[1977?\].

[41] [Accessed April 14,13, 2013. Dennis Morgan relates that he paid
$310 for his boots in 1973 ($1720 in 2013 dollars), a three-fold
increase since the
mid-1960s.](http://thedennismorganshow.blogspot.com/2007/09/charlie-dunn-loved-this-song-and-his.html)

[42]

[43] Don Counts quoted in Art Chapman, Obituary of Charlie Dunn, Fort
Worth *Star-Telegram* September 28, 1993, 12A.

[44] Robyn Turner, *Austin Originals: Chats with Colorful Characters*
Amarillo, TX: Paramount Publishing, 1982.

[45] Obituary, September 25, 1993, Dallas *Morning News*; Carolyn
Poirot, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*, May 10, 1982, 2B.

[46] "A Texas Tradition," *Us Magazine*, April 4, 1978, 71.

[47] Interview with Don Counts, July 11; 2012 Art Chapman, Obituary of
Charlie Dunn, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram* September 28, 1993, 11A. Counts
was Walker's personal physician, e.g.; see Yvonne Saliba, Dallas
*Times-Herald*, April 17, 1977, 6.

[48]

[49] Art Chapman, Obituary of Charlie Dunn, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*
September 28, 1993, 12A (quotation). Michael Wallis, *Philip Morris
Magazine*, November–December 1989, 32. Wallis refers to Counts and his
partner in the venture, Steve Wiener, as "two entrepreneurs." While the
tag may have fit Wiener, it certainly did not fit Counts, who was an
established physician and was motivated by concerns other than
profitability; see below. Yvonne Saliba, Dallas *Times-Herald*, April
17, 1977, 1, refers to Wiener inaccurately as a "San Antonio attorney."

[50] Interviews with Steve Weiner, September 9, 2012 and Counts.

[51] Interview with Steve Wiener, September 9, 2012.

[52] Yvonne Saliba, Dallas *Times-Herald*, April 17, 1977; interview Don
Counts, September 2012; Michael Wallis, *Philip Morris Magazine*,
November–December 1989, 32.

[53] Art Chapman, Obituary of Charlie Dunn, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*
September 28, 1993, 12A.

[54] Austin *American-Statesman*, September 28, 1979. According to
Counts and Wiener, Charlie never wanted a percentage, just a guaranteed
salary. Steiner had paid Charlie by the hour, never with a salary.
Wiener concludes that the arrangement meant that "Don \[Counts\] and I
paid Charlie more money than \[anyone\] ever paid a bootmaker";
interview with Steve Wiener, September 9, 2012.

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58] Carolyn Poirot, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*, May 10, 1982, 2B.

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63] Interviews with Lee Miller, September 12 and December 8, 2012.

[64]

[65] Steve Hannah, Milwaukee *Journal* n.d. \[1977?\].

[66]

[67] E. Jay Schempf, "The Bootmaker's Art," *Muse Air Monthly Magazine*,
August 1985, 37.

[68]

[69] E. Jay Schempf, "The Bootmaker's Art," *Muse Air Monthly Magazine*,
August 1985, 36.

[70] "Texas Craftsman: Keeper of a Dying Flame," *Texas Home*, June
1980, 86.

[71] "Texas Craftsman: Keeper of a Dying Flame," *Texas Home*, June
1980, 87.

[72] Steve Schlegel, "Charlie Dunn: A Legend in Leather," *Texas
Historian*, November 1979, 2.

[73] Melissa Sones, UPI, January 2, 1986, in *Rocky Mountain News*,
10-S.

[74]

[75] Billy Porterfield, Austin *American-Statesman*, n.d., n.p.

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81] Interviews with Miller and Weiner.

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87] A Texas Tradition," *Us Magazine*, April 4, 1978, 71.

[88]

[89] Melissa Sones, UPI, January 2, 1986, in *Rocky Mountain News*, 10-S
(first quotation); *Southern Living*, n.d., 178 (second quotation).

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93] "Texas Craftsman: Keeper of a Dying Flame," *Texas Home*, June
1980, 84.

[94] *Charlie Dunn: At Last*, D: Gordon Thomas, Third Coast Video
(1983).

[95]

[96]

[97] Sandy Adzergy, "Texas Traditions," *Tune-In*, May 1988, 16;
interviews with Lee Miller, September 12 and December 8, 2012.

[98] Sandy Adzergy, "Texas Traditions," *Tune-In*, May 1988, 16.

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105] Interviews with Counts and Miller.

[106] Mayor Lee Cooke, City of Austin Proclamation setting Charlie Dunn
Day, September 19, 1988.

[107] Press release and Austin media clippings from Deep Eddy Arts,
September 19, 1988, one of the sponsors of the events. The other sponsor
was Texas Traditions, Charlie's former shop.

[108] Obituary, September 25, 1993, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*; Michael
Wallis, "Made for Walking," *Philip Morris Magazine*, November–December
1989, 30.

[109] Obituary from September 25, 1993.

[110] Art Chapman, Obituary of Charlie Dunn, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*
September 28, 1993, 11A.

[111] Pete Szilagyi, obituary of Charlie Dunn, Austin
*American-Statesman*, September, 28?, 1993.

[112] Julia Parmenter quoted in Beth Bond, "Local Shop's Custom Boots
Defined by Handed-Down Approach to Craft," Austin American-Statesman,
March 8, 2011. Parmenter was an apprentice at Texas Traditions in 2011.

[113] Beth Bond, "Local Shop's Custom Boots Defined by Handed-Down
Approach to Craft," Austin American-Statesman, March 8, 2011.

[114] Art Chapman, Obituary of Charlie Dunn, Fort Worth *Star-Telegram*
September 28, 1993, 12A. Miller is quoted as saying that Charlie slept
in the boots, kangaroo with six-row multicolor stitching.

[115] Interview with Don Counts, July 11, 2012.

[116] Casey Laframboise quoted in Beth Bond, "Local Shop's Custom Boots
Defined by Handed-Down Approach to Craft," *Austin American-Statesman*,
March 8, 2011. Laframboise is an intern at Texas Traditions.