![](Shoemuseum_Lausanne-IMG_7291.JPG "fig:Shoemuseum_Lausanne-IMG_7291.JPG")
![](Chopine_(PSF).jpg "fig:Chopine_(PSF).jpg")

A **chopine** is a type of women's [platform
shoe](platform_shoe "wikilink") that was popular in the 15th, 16th and
17th centuries. Chopines were originally used as a
[patten](Patten_(shoe) "wikilink"), [clog](clog_(shoe) "wikilink"), or
[overshoe](overshoe "wikilink") to protect the shoes and dress from mud
and street soil.

Chopines were popularly worn in [Venice](Venice "wikilink") by both
[courtesans](courtesan "wikilink") and patrician women from c. 1400 to
1700. Besides their practical uses, the height of the chopine became a
symbolic reference to the cultural and social standing of the wearer;
the higher the chopine, the higher the status of the wearer.[1] High
chopines allowed a woman to tower over others. During the
[Renaissance](Renaissance "wikilink"), chopines became an article of
women's [fashion](fashion "wikilink") and were made increasingly taller;
some extant examples are over 20 inches (50 cm) high.[2] In 1430, the
height of chopines was [limited by Venetian
law](High_heel_policy "wikilink") to three inches, but this regulation
was widely ignored.[3] [Shakespeare](Shakespeare "wikilink") joked about
the extreme height of the chopines in style in his day by using the word
*altitude* (*[Hamlet](Hamlet "wikilink")* 2.2, the prince greets one of
the visiting players – the adolescent boy who would have played the
female parts in the all-male troupe – by noting how much "nearer to
heaven" the lad had grown since he last saw him "by the altitude of a
chopine").

Surviving chopines are typically made of [wood](wood "wikilink") or
[cork](Cork_(material) "wikilink"), and those in the Spanish style were
sometimes banded about with [metal](metal "wikilink"). Extant pieces are
covered with [leather](leather "wikilink"), brocades, or
jewel-embroidered [velvet](velvet "wikilink"). Often, the fabric of the
chopine matched the dress or the shoe, but not always. However, despite
being highly decorated, chopines were often hidden under the wearer's
skirt and were hidden from any critical observation. Although due to the
design of the shoes, they caused the wearer to have a very "comical
walk".[4]

According to some scholars, chopines caused an unstable and inelegant
gait. Noblewomen wearing them were generally accompanied by two servants
in order to walk around safely, by supporting themselves on the
servants' shoulders.[5] Other scholars have argued that with practice a
woman could walk and even dance gracefully.[6] In his dancing manual
*Nobilità di dame* (1600), the Italian dancing master [Fabritio
Caroso](Fabritio_Caroso "wikilink") writes that with care a woman
practiced in wearing her chopines could move “with grace, seemliness,
and beauty” and even "dance flourishes and
[galliard](galliard "wikilink") variations".[7] Chopines were usually
put on with the help of two servants.

In the 15th century, chopines were also the style in
[Spain](Spain "wikilink"). Their popularity in Spain was so great that
the larger part of the nation's cork supplies went towards production of
the shoes. Some argue that the style originated in Spain, as there are
many extant examples and a great amount of pictorial and written
reference going back to the 14th century.[8] Chopines of the Spanish
style were more often conical and symmetric, while their Venetian
counterparts are much more artistically carved. That is not to say,
however, that Spanish chopines were not adorned; on the contrary, there
is evidence of jeweling, gilt lettering along the surround (the material
covering the cork or wooden base), tooling, and embroidery on Spanish
chopines.

There are a great many cognates of the word chopine (chapiney, choppins,
etc.). However, neither the word chopine nor any word similar to it
(chioppino, cioppino, etc.) appears in Florio's dictionaries of either
1598 or 1611. The Italian word, instead, seems to be "zoccoli", which
likely comes from the Italian word "zocco," meaning a stump or a block
of wood. Florio does, however, use the word "chopinos" in his English
definition of zoccoli.

## See also

-   [Geta (footwear)](Geta_(footwear) "wikilink")
-   [Chopine, volume](Pint#Other_pints "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   <http://www.aands.org/raisedheels>
-   <http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/~ebernhar/index.shtml>
-   <http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ho/08/eustn/hod_1973.114.4a,b.htm>

[Category:Historical footwear](Category:Historical_footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Medieval costume](Category:Medieval_costume "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink")

[1] Coryat Thomas, *Crudities* (London, 1611) ed. 1905, p. 400.

[2] The tallest extant chopines are in the Museo Correr in Venice,
Italy.

[3]

[4]

[5] Bossan, Marie-Josèphe. "The Renaissance". *The Art of the Shoe*.
Trans. Rebecca Brimacombe. New York: Parkstone, 2012. p. 35. via Google
Books. Parkstone International, 08 May 2012. Web. 02 May 2014.
\<https://books.google.com/books?id=2Ifj9h4Z4YQC&pg=PA35&dq=chopines
shoes&hl=en&sa=X&ei=SDhkU_q3H5DZoAS4hoKQAw&ved=0CEYQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q=chopines
shoes&f=false>.

[6] Barbara Ravelhofer, *The Early Stuart Masque: Dance, Costume, and
Music* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), p. 113, fn 47.

[7] [Fabritio Caroso](Fabritio_Caroso "wikilink"), *Nobilità di dame*
(Venice, 1600), translated as *Courtly Dance of the Renaissance:
Nobilità di dame*, ed. and trans. Julia Sutton and F. Marian Walker (New
York, 1995), p. 141.

[8] [Anderson, Ruth Matilda](Anderson,_Ruth_Matilda "wikilink").
*Hispanic costume, 1480-1530.*