![](Chukka_boot.jpg "Chukka_boot.jpg")

**Chukka boots** ([1]) are ankle-high leather [boots](boot "wikilink")
with suede or leather uppers, leather or rubber soles, and [open
lacing](open_lacing "wikilink") with two or three pairs of
[eyelets](eyelets "wikilink").[2] The name *chukka* possibly comes from
the game of [polo](polo "wikilink"), where a chukka is a period of
play.[3]

Generally, "chukka boot" refers to a form of desert boots originally
worn by [British](United_Kingdom "wikilink") soldiers in the [Western
Desert Campaign](Western_Desert_Campaign "wikilink") of [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink").[4][5]

## Materials and style

Chukkas are usually made from [calfskin](calfskin "wikilink") or
[suede](suede "wikilink"),[6] although they can be made from other
materials.[7] The style first became popular in the late 1940s through
the 1960s as [casual](casual_attire "wikilink") wear.[8][9][10] In the
21st century, chukkas persist as a popular menswear shoe, particularly
in the [United Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink"). They can be worn
with both [suits](Suit_(clothing) "wikilink") and more casual wear like
[jeans](jeans "wikilink").[11][12]

According to shoe historian [June Swann](June_Swann "wikilink"), the
essential chukka boot is ankle-high, open-laced, and unlined, with two
to three pairs of eyelets, thin leather soles, calfskin suede uppers in
two parts (each from a single piece of leather; quarters sewn on top of
[vamp](Shoe#Shoe_construction "wikilink")), and rounded toes.[13]

![](Red_Wing_chukkas.jpeg "fig:Red_Wing_chukkas.jpeg") soles\]\]
![](Chukka_boot,_black_leather.jpg "fig:Chukka_boot,_black_leather.jpg")
"209" chukka boot, black leather\]\]

## Desert boot

![](Clarks_Desert_Boot_in_Sand_May_14.jpg "Clarks_Desert_Boot_in_Sand_May_14.jpg")

A **desert boot** is a chukka boot with [crepe
rubber](crepe_rubber "wikilink") soles and, typically, suede uppers.
Desert boots were popularized in the 1950s by UK shoe company [C. & J.
Clark](C._&_J._Clark "wikilink").[14]

Desert boots were officially introduced to the world with the debut of
the Clarks' Desert Boot at the 1949 Chicago Shoe Fair. After feature
coverage in *[Esquire](Esquire_(magazine) "wikilink")* magazine, their
popularity took-off. According to Clarks, inspiration came from "the
crepe-soled, rough suede boots made in Cairo's [Khan el-Khalili
bazaar](Khan_el-Khalili "wikilink") for British [Eighth
Army](Eighth_Army_(United_Kingdom) "wikilink") officers."

These boots were based on the South African
[veldskoen](veldskoen "wikilink") which became a popular footwear item
in Southern Africa due to their robust and simple design. Often being
bought by soldiers for use in the various bush wars of the region, they
have become popular across the world as "desert boots".[15]

## See also

-   [Desert Combat Boot](Desert_Combat_Boot "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink")

[1] (*NB* In pronunciation keys, Wikipedia uses the phonemic-/ʌ/
convention while Merriam uses the stressed-/ə/ convention).

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7] .

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15] Velskoen, pronounced 'fell-skoon' and known colloquially as
'vellies,' are the ancestor of the modern-day desert boot. They were
first made in the 1600s by members of the Dutch East India Co., inspired
by the footwear of the Khoisan tribe. Currently, in South Africa and
Namibia, vellies are worn by people from all walks of life especially,
laborers, bush rangers, and university students. —[Herbert Schier
Velskoen Desert
Boots](http://www.selectism.com/2010/06/29/herbert-schier-velskoen-desert-boots/)()
and "Relatively unknown outside of Africa, the velskoen—pronounced
'fell-skoon' and known colloquially as 'vellies'—are actually the
ancestor of the modern day desert boot. —[Brothere
Vellies](http://www.brothervellies.com/site/about)