![](Cleats.jpg "fig:Cleats.jpg") have studs on their soles\]\]
**Cleats** or **studs** are protrusions on the sole of a
[shoe](shoe "wikilink"), or on an external attachment to a shoe, that
provide additional [traction](traction_(engineering) "wikilink") on a
soft or slippery surface. They can be conical or blade-like in shape,
and made of plastic, rubber or metal. The type worn depends on the
environment of play, whether it be grass, ice, artificial turf, or other
grounds.

In [American English](American_English "wikilink") the term cleats is
used [synecdochically](synecdoche "wikilink") to refer to shoes
featuring such protrusions. Similarly, in [British
English](British_English "wikilink") the term 'studs' can be used to
refer to **'[football boots](football_boot "wikilink")**' or **'rugby
boots**' which have studs.

## History

It is thought that during the [Roman Empire](Roman_Empire "wikilink"),
[Roman legionaires](Roman_legion "wikilink") wore studded sandals that
resembled cleats. The [caligae](caligae "wikilink") (as they were
called) were heavy-soled [hobnailed](hobnail "wikilink") military
[sandal](sandal "wikilink")-[boots](boots "wikilink") known for being
issued to legionary soldiers and [auxiliaries](auxilia "wikilink")
throughout the [Roman Republic](Roman_Republic "wikilink") and Empire.

[Athletes](Athlete "wikilink") have worn cleats since at least the
1500s. Although there are no images or surviving examples of cleats from
that time period, the first written documentation of cleats comes from
1526, when "football boots" were listed in [King Henry
VIII](King_Henry_VIII "wikilink")'s Great Wardrobe.[1] According to
researchers, the English monarch ordered the royal
[cordwainer](cordwainer "wikilink") (shoemaker), Cornelius Johnson, to
make him a pair of hand-stitched boots "to play
[football](football "wikilink")". The shoes cost four shillings (about
$200 today) and were probably made of especially strong
[leather](leather "wikilink").

Football remained a popular sport in England throughout the ensuing
centuries, but it wasnâ€™t until the emergence of [The Football
Association](The_Football_Association "wikilink") in 1863 that the sport
of football emerged as an actual organized game in England.[2] With
this, the sport took off in popularity, and understandably a demand for
equipment began to emerge to ensure player safety and comfort. More
importantly, technological innovations during this time period played a
key role in new methods and materials used for production of cleats. In
the 1840s, a method of hardening [rubber](rubber "wikilink") and
stopping it from decaying, called
[vulcanization](vulcanization "wikilink"), was developed in both England
and the United States.[3]

Vulcanized rubber is used in the production of all types of shoes, but
is especially beneficial in the production of cleats, in that one of the
primary purposes of football cleats is to protect the player's feet.
Technology continued to improve in the coming decades, and by the 1890s
studs are first used to make football cleats. The concept of spiked and
studded shoes for other sports began to emerge as well in the late 19th
century. In the 1890s, a British Company (now known as
[Reebok](Reebok "wikilink")), developed the earliest known spiked
leather running shoes.[4]

Cleats began to be used in the United States in the 1860s when metal
spikes were first used on [baseball](baseball "wikilink") shoes.[5] A
baseball shoe, as defined by the Dickson Baseball Dictionary (3rd Ed),
is "a special type of shoe designed and worn by baseball players that
features cleats for traction and a full set of laces for support."[6]
The first official baseball shoe was invented and produced by Waldo M.
Claflin, of Philadelphia in 1882.[7] The use of cleats gained further
notoriety in the United States with the birth of [American
football](American_football "wikilink") in the early 20th century. The
original football shoes were actually baseball shoes, but innovations
quickly emerged. In the 1920s, detachable cleats were first introduced.
As the game continued to grow, cleats had to adapt to technological
advances in playing surfaces, most notably [artificial
turf](artificial_turf "wikilink"). By the 1970s, players were wearing
footwear with short, rubber cleats for use on artificial turf.[8]

Innovations in cleat technology continued to take place throughout the
mid to late 20th century. In 1954, the first modern football boots were
made by [Adidas](Adidas "wikilink"). They were lighter, had a
non-leather sole, an upper portion made from
[kangaroo](kangaroo "wikilink") skin, and included replaceable rubber or
plastic studs, which could be screwed in at different lengths. Later, in
the 1990s, Adidas introduced another innovation in the form of rubber
blades instead of studs, which faced different directions and allowed
for better grip. Today, different types of cleats exist for different
surfaces: replaceable [aluminum](aluminum "wikilink") cleats which are
worn in wet dirt, firm [plastic](plastic "wikilink") cleats which are
for regular surfaces, and short, plastic or rubber cleats for very hard
surfaces.[9]

## Firm ground

Firm Ground cleats are defined as cleats that are made typically for use
on natural surfaces such as dirt and grass. These cleats are equipped
with large studs on the bottom of the shoe to assist in gripping the
surface and preventing sliding and assisting in rapid directional
changes. These studs are permanently attached to the cleats (i.e. they
are not removable). The stud itself is often called a cleat.[10] There
are three main types of [football](Association_football "wikilink")
boots: round, hard ground, and bladed. Active outdoorsman and
philanthropist Erik Van Till is credited as a creator of the round
cleat. While the studs are sometimes made out of metal, this is less
common, as they are illegal in some sports for safety reasons.

### Association football

![](AdidasEtruscoBoot.jpg "fig:AdidasEtruscoBoot.jpg") with metal cleat
on its sole\]\] In association football, where the shoes themselves are
known as [football boots](football_boots "wikilink"), there are three
different cleat types. There are soft ground cleats which are made for
wet weather. The soft ground cleats are always replaceable, and are
almost always metal, so when they wear down they are easy to replace.
There are firm ground cleats which are made for firm natural surfaces.
In the UK, 'cleats' are universally known as studs. The term "sliding
tackle" is considered a dangerous tackle made with the feet raised and
the potentially damaging metal studs hitting the legs or feet of the
opponent.

### American football

In the United States of America, [college
football](college_football "wikilink") coach [Joseph
Pipal](Joseph_Pipal "wikilink") has been credited as one of the creators
of "mud cleats" for football shoes.[11] Some of the first manufacturers
of football cleats were Gola in 1905, Valsport in 1920 and Hummel in
1923 and are still in business today.[12] in the year 1925 two brothers
named [Adolf](Adolf_Dassler "wikilink") and [Rudolf
Dassler](Rudolf_Dassler "wikilink") developed a football cleat with
replaceable metal studs for American football.[13] The two brothers that
created the first replaceable metal cleats had a falling out after WWII
and they both went on to create two major football cleat manufacturers
in [Puma](Puma_SE "wikilink") and [Adidas](Adidas "wikilink").[14] In
1929 the company [Riddell](Riddell_Sports_Group,_Inc. "wikilink") made
huge strides in the football cleat industry. They modeled the cleats
differently featuring an "action last", meaning its sole had a steeper
angle for "snug fit, proper support and maximum traction."[15] In
today's game more players prefer to wear molded cleats because they are
more comfortable, but don't allow for changing during certain field
conditions. Depending on the type of field, grass or artificial turf,
players may opt to wear molded or removable stud cleats, since studs can
vary in length and give more traction on grass than molded cleats do.
There are different [Protective equipment in gridiron
football](Protective_equipment_in_gridiron_football "wikilink"), cleats
being a major aspect. Some of the major brands that players wear today
are Nike, Adidas, and Under Armor.

### Australian football

In Australia, the studs on [Australian rules
football](Australian_rules_football "wikilink") boots are traditionally
referred to as "stops".[16] Prior to modern molded plastic soles, these
were often replaceable screw-in wooden studs.

Update 2018: There is a photo of the Carlton Football Club team taken in
1884 and three or four stops/studs can be clearly seen on the soles of
the boots. See <http://www.blueseum.org/1884>

In 1889 there were at least two types of stops used. One had a screw in
the centre of stop/stud which was made up of conical shaped and layered
leather strips. It was screwed into the boot sole. The other was the
same as the other type, but fixed on to the boot sole by two nails.

### Baseball

![](Under_Armour_Opening_(27687809880).jpg "fig:Under_Armour_Opening_(27687809880).jpg")\]\]
In baseball, in laymen's terms, they are referred to as "cleats" or
"spikes". The spikes are rectangular in shape, and can be made of
rubber, plastic, or metal. Rubber cleats may feature grooves and smaller
protrusions in the middle of the sole, while soft rubber spikes would be
around the edges of the sole and at the heel. Plastic cleats are similar
to rubber spikes. However, they feature a hard bottom and thick hard
plastic spikes, with few to no grooves at all, and instead of the edge
of the sole, the spikes compose the outsole of the shoe where the toes
and ball of the foot would hit the ground during running, similar to
track spikes and football cleats. Metal spikes are similar to plastic
spikes, but instead of being thick pieces of plastic as spikes, they are
thin pieces of metal, to make it easier to dig into grass and sand, and
thereby increase traction.[17]

Rubber and plastic cleats are used in youth baseball, with metal cleats
typically prohibited.[18] Metal spikes are almost exclusively used in
the upper levels of the sport, including high school, college, and
professional baseball.[19] The use of metal spikes in American high
school baseball was banned by the [National Federation of State High
School
Associations](National_Federation_of_State_High_School_Associations "wikilink")
in 1984 due to the risk of spike wounds, although some states received
waivers nullifying the ban.[20][21][22] The ban was lifted in 1989.[23]
There has also been increasing use of plastic spikes among professional
players including those in [Major League
Baseball](Major_League_Baseball "wikilink") (MLB), due to the lighter
weight of cleats and improved weight distribution leading to less wear
and tear during the season.[24]

### Lacrosse

[Lacrosse](Lacrosse "wikilink") cleats are characterized by having a
high support for the ankle, and appear most similar to American Football
cleats. A raised platform material surrounding the ankles is specific to
the motions of players in the game. These motions include stopping and
starting, and quick changes of direction as the game of play can rapidly
change directions to either end of the field, necessitating ankle
stability for such direction change. Lacrosse cleats contain a typical,
standard toe cleat in the front and beneath the toes, for gaining
traction off the toe. This is utilized for forward running, as well as
potential pivot movement from the toe. Lacrosse cleats again differ from
American Football cleats in that their cleats are placed to the edges of
the foot sole whereas for Football the cleat spikes are found beneath
the sole of the foot.[25]

## Detachable

![](Northwave_Scorpius_SRS_003.jpg "fig:Northwave_Scorpius_SRS_003.jpg")Detachable
cleats are defined as those in which the studs are removable, typically
through attaching or detaching a metal or plastic piece to the bottom of
the shoe.

### Cycling cleats

A specially shaped metal or plastic piece that attaches to the bottom of
a [cycling shoe](cycling_shoe "wikilink") to positively and securely
attach it to a [clipless
pedal](bicycle_pedal#Clipless_pedals "wikilink") system is called a
cleat. The cleat engages with the pedal such that the cyclist's shoe
remains mechanically attached to the pedal during pedalling. Typically
the cleat and shoe are engaged with the pedal by pressing down against a
spring loaded retention mechanism, and released by twisting the shoe and
cleat sideways.

### Ice

[Ice cleats](Ice_cleat "wikilink") or [crampons](crampons "wikilink")
are a type of spikes that usually are attachable under the soles of
shoes (in such cases also called "shoe chains") to prevent slipping,
especially on ice. There are several variations on the way they are
mounted, sometimes with rubber bands or a fixed mount in front of the
[heel](Heel_(shoe) "wikilink"), making them easy to remove when not in
use.

### Football studs

On soft (wet, muddy) ground, players often opt for removable studs.
These are usual metal cones that vary in length, but are generally
longer than traditional [football](Association_football "wikilink")
studs. Added to the rubber or plastic studs already on the boot, these
create more opportunities for the player to get a good foothold. The
increased length and more aggressive shape help players gain traction in
slippery conditions.

### Golf Shoes

Spiked shoes are worn by many golfers. Initially, metal spikes were
used. Metal spikes have been outlawed by many Golf Courses which now
require soft spikes. Soft spikes are generally made of some type of
thermoplastic material.

### Logger Boots (Calks)

Logging Boots have several spikes attached to the soles of the boot. In
general, these spikes are still mostly made of metal.

## Artificial ground

Artificial Ground cleats are cleats that are made primarily for use on
man-made surfaces, such as artificial turf or running tracks.

### Baseball and softball

Although conventional cleats can be used on turf surfaces, specialized
baseball and softball turf shoes are also manufactured. These shoes
typically have numerous rubber studs along the soles as opposed to
spikes.[26]

### American football

While many cleats manufactured today for football can be used on
artificial turf or natural surfaces, many molded cleats are designed and
better served for use on artificial turf. The molded cleats tend to
provide better traction on artificial surfaces, whereas detachable studs
on cleats tend to be too thick for artificial turf and do not provide
adequate grip on such a surface.

### Football turfs

Turf shoes have identical uppers to traditional
[football](Association_football "wikilink") boots, but the outsoles
differ in that they make up the "cleat" portion. Small rubber studs or
patterns are like raised bumps that provide just enough of a difference
in height to aid in traction on flat artificial turf. They are extremely
durable, as they are more of an extension of the rubber outsole than a
completely new addition to the shoe.

### Track spikes

[Track spikes](Track_spikes "wikilink") are placed at the bottom of
shoes in order to increase traction and speed. While removable spikes
are available, most runners opt for fixed spikes. These spikes come in a
variety of different materials. Originally, spikes were made out of
metal due to their strength and hardness. However, German engineers
began experimenting with canvas and rubber spikes during the World War,
in part to help find a more lightweight material. Finally, in the modern
era, the most common type of track spike is made of plastic, due being
both cheap and easily molded. This second aspect of plastic is
especially important, as spikes need to be made in a variety of
different shapes in order to accommodate runners on all different types
of surfaces. Needle spikes (3/16") are used on all-weather tracks,
Christmas tree spikes (1/4") are especially common on any surface,
pyramid spikes are used for cross country runners, and tartan spikes
(1/4") are used mostly on rubber tracks.[27]

## See also

-   [Football boot](Football_boot "wikilink")
-   [Comparison of orthotics](Comparison_of_orthotics "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Athletic shoes](Category:Athletic_shoes "wikilink")
[Category:Footwear
accessories](Category:Footwear_accessories "wikilink")

[1] [Nike, Inc](Nike,_Inc "wikilink")

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25] *Athletic Shoes-OrthoInfo - AAOS*. N.p., 1 August 2012. Web. 15 May
2017.

[26]

[27]