![](Red_Lancashire_clogs_(side_view).jpg "fig:Red_Lancashire_clogs_(side_view).jpg").
Similar style clogs are made throughout the Kingdom. Note the plastic
soling to protect the wood from wear.\]\]

A **British clog** is a wooden soled [clog](Clog_(shoe) "wikilink") from
[Great Britain](Great_Britain "wikilink"). The
[uppers](Shoe#Construction "wikilink") are typically leather, and many
variations exist in style and fastening.

## History

There are two explanations of the development of the English style clog.
They may have evolved from [pattens](pattens "wikilink") which were
slats of wood held in place by thonging or similar
[strapping](strap "wikilink"). They were usually worn under leather or
fabric shoes to raise the wearer's foot above the mud of the unmade
road, not to mention commonly dumped human
[effluent](effluent "wikilink") and animal [dung](Feces "wikilink").
Those too poor to afford [shoes](shoe "wikilink") wore wood directly
against the skin or [hosiery](hosiery "wikilink"), and thus the clog was
developed, made of part leather and part wood. Alternatively they have
been described as far back as Roman times, possibly earlier.

![](The_Dinner_Hour,_Wigan_-_detail.jpg "fig:The_Dinner_Hour,_Wigan_-_detail.jpg")
The wearing of clogs in Britain became more visible with the Industrial
Revolution, when industrial workers needed strong, cheap footwear. Men
and women wore laced and clasped clogs respectively, the fastening
clasps being of engraved brass or more commonly steel. Nailed under the
sole at toe and heel were *clog irons*, called *calkers* or *cokers*,
generally 3/8" wide x 1/4" thick with a groove down the middle to
protected the nail heads from wear. The heyday of the clog in Britain
was between the 1840s and 1920s and, although traditionally associated
with [Lancashire](Lancashire "wikilink"), they were worn all over the
country, not just in the industrial [North of
England](North_of_England "wikilink"). Indeed, Mark Clyndes of Walkleys
says "More clogs were worn down south than in the northern industrial
towns". The London fish docks, fruit markets and the mines of Kent being
particularly noted. Through manufacture, repair and wear clogs could
become individually recognised. In the aftermath of disasters they could
be a means of identifying the victims, as happened after the [Clifton
Hall Colliery](Clifton_Hall_Colliery "wikilink") disaster where at least
two men could only be identified this way.[1][2][3]

Clogs were sometimes handed out as part of poor relief; the Blackburn
Weekly Telegraph recorded five people receiving "gifts of clogs or
parcels of clothing" in 1912.

Although associated in the popular mind with dancing, clogs are still
used in industry and are available tested to EN345. Such clogs are
particularly advantageous in metal working industries where hot swarf or
spashes of molten metal may be found on the floor. In 1989 three
shiploads of clogs were sent to The Netherlands due to the perceived
inferiority of the Dutch clog in wet fields.

## Construction

![](ClogSoleSideView.jpg "fig:ClogSoleSideView.jpg")
![](ClogSoleTopView.jpg "fig:ClogSoleTopView.jpg") In the past the
English tended to employ Welsh and West Country
[alder](alder "wikilink"), Scottish [birch](birch "wikilink") and
Lincolnshire [willow](willow "wikilink") for the
[soles](Sole_(shoe) "wikilink"). The Welsh favoured
[alder](alder "wikilink"), [birch](birch "wikilink") &
[sycamore](sycamore "wikilink"). for their clog
[soles](Sole_(shoe) "wikilink").

The traditional method of construction starts with gangs of itinerant
woodsmen who would buy a stand of timber for the felling. The regular
gangs would operate in a similar fashion to coppice workers and
circulate around 12 stands in 12 years to allow regrowth. The timber was
felled and sawn to length. Logs from larger trees were split; that from
smaller coppice wood did not require splitting. The billets were roughly
shaped with a [stock knife](stock_knife "wikilink") and a deep notch put
in where the sole and heel meet. All the work was done in green wood
which is easier to work than seasoned wood. The clog blocks were then
generally stacked up in open pyramids to allow the air to circulate and
seasoned for a few months. The offcuts and waste was sold on, either as
pea-sticks and firewood to provide money for food or else as fuel to the
wool dyeing trade.

The seasoned wood was sold on to the master clogger who would finish the
work on the now dry, seasoned wood. The same stock knives were used for
shaping with two more pivot knives, the hollower and the gripper bit.
The latter is used to cut the rebate to hold the upper. The final
operation is to finish the sole perfectly smooth by rasps and short
bladed knives.

Grew & Neergaard summise that a similar method was used in medieval
times, in part from an illustration in the Mendel Housebook. A workman
is shown using a small hand adze for finishing pattens with drawknives
(or possibly stock knives) hanging on the wall behind.

The uppers are made from leather either cut according to patterns or
stamped out. At the lighter end are various styles of sandals, then
through shoe types to industrial, farming and army boots. When cutting
either card or metal patterns are used, with the latter the knife makes
a clicking sound and the term used is "clicking out". The vamp and the
quarters and heel stiffener are stitched together and eyelets or
fastenings attached.

Traditionally using Indian Water Buffalo Waxed Kip the uppers were
stretched over a solid straight last, using lasting pincers and the hot
Half Round Bottom Glazer to heat and soften the leather, and once cooled
and set to shape were transferred and tack lasted onto the soles. In the
20th century sprung lasts became used allowing whatever leather utilised
to be tacked directly to the soles The junction is secured with brass or
steel clog welt tacks nailed over narrow strip of leather (the welt).
Most clogs are finished off with external brass or steel *toe tins* to
protect the toe of the clog when kicking or kneeling. Those on the
leather welt strip covering the join of leather and wood are called
"inners" and those covering the wooden soles are "outers". Clogs could
have either or both. The steel toecap used in safety clogs is generally
fitted under the leather and is another item again.

Finally the soling is applied according to the customer's requirements.
Clog-irons have been mentioned above, clogs are also shod (horse-shoe
shaped rubber) or fully soled and heeled with rubber.

### Woods

**[Alder](Alder "wikilink")** was plentiful and cheap; the tree grows
next to streams. The wood is easy to work by hand, but not durable in
damp conditions. Like elm it needs to be fully immersed in water for it
to be durable. It is quite light, and could be cut into a thick sole
without adding too much weight. According to Grew and de Neergaard it is
"resilient and extremely durable when wet, \[and\] has been the
favourite material for clog-making in England right up to the present
day". It was popular in the hot industries (steel making for example)
because replacement woods could be quickly made, and it was rarely
constantly damp. However being relatively soft, it makes a poor dance
clog, where sound is important. Another disadvantage is that the wood
has a tendency to split if taken from the centre of the tree. So much
alder was used for clogs that in parts of Wales it was called *Pren
Clocsia* (Clog Wood) rather than *Gwern*.

**Beech** is a good wood for machining, but suffers from being heavy and
having a short grain. Modern machined-beech soles tend to be thinner
with a shallower cast (the curve to the toe). This is not a problem for
factory work, but is a disadvantage for dancing and hill walking. In the
former case there is less spring and in the latter case the wearer tends
to cantilever off the tip of the toe which gets worn quickly. Machine
soles were generally of flatter profile, possibly so as to get more
soles from a balk of timber. "I'd sell my Grandmother for a ha'penny a
pair". They were comfortable when standing at machinery all day, indeed
the safety toecap made only fits a shallower sole with less "cast".

**Sycamore** is light and hard with a longer grain than beech and wears
well. It was the wood of choice in much of Pembrokeshire, where it was
worked green. In a 1920s government survey of rural trades and crafts it
was stated that the Welsh would pay double for Sycamore. However its use
was unknown in many other parts of Wales. Sycamore can be worked wet
without being seasoned as it is the most stable of woods, indeed it must
be if the traditional carving tools are used, as it dries too hard to be
commercially viable, possibly the reason it was little used.

**Ash** is considered by Tefor Owen to be the best wood for dance soles,
but it does not wear as well as sycamore. If the clogs are only to be
used on wooden floors he recommends it, otherwise the better-wearing
properties of sycamore win out. Ash can have a tendency to delaminate
along the growth rings when bruised.

**Willow** is another wood with good resistance to moist conditions. It
can be tough and resilient. Lincolnshire willow found favour amongst
English cloggers, and Willow was also favoured in the [Trough of
Bowland](Trough_of_Bowland "wikilink"), but was never widely used in
Wales. Which type of Willow was used is uncertain, and as there are many
varieties of willow tree, this information is not particularly helpful.
(In a parallel example, Sycamore is a Maple, but Field Maple has far
less split resistance, and Norway Maple dries out about as heavy as
Beech.)

Closely related to the willow (in the same family, *Salicaceae*) are the
poplars, including the **Aspen**. The Aspen is used for French
[sabots](Sabot_(shoe) "wikilink"). In medieval England this wood was
specifically banned for patten making (4 Henry V c.3 of 1416) in order
to preserve the stock for arrows. Anyone caught flouting the law was
subject to a hundred shilling (£5) fine, half of which was paid to the
Fletchers. By 1464-5 however it was permitted (4 Edward IV c.9) to use
"such Timber of Asp, that is not apt, sufficient, nor convenient to be
made into (arrowshafts)" because "Asp timber be the best and lightest
Timber to make Pattens and Clogs". This may have been due to its
resistance to abrasion when used as a bare sole against the ground.

### Leather

**Kip** full grain leather was a Water Buffalo hide impregnated with
tallow, oils and waxes; it was made in India. Split Kip was split
leather and was often used just on the heel (the quarters). The presence
of wax and oil made the leather hard, and necessitated a heated Half
Round Bottom Glazer for shaping over the last. Kip lasts up to 40 years,
but is no longer imported.

**Crust-dyed chrome** 2–4 mm thick is used by some makers.

**Vegetable tan leather** can be too stiff, insufficiently strong and
not waterproof, although some European Veg Tan can be very supple and
tough.

## Clog-dancing

Clog dancing should not be confused with [Morris
dancing](Morris_dance "wikilink"), which may be performed in clogs.

There is a theory that *clogging* or clog dancing arose in these
industrial [textiles](textiles "wikilink") mills as a result of the mill
workers entertaining themselves by syncopating foot taps with the
rhythmic sounds made by the loom shuttles. [Clog
dancing](Clog_dance "wikilink") became a widespread pastime during this
period in England. During the nineteenth century, competitions were
held, and professional clog dancers performed in the music halls.

Clog dancing is a continuing tradition in [Wales](Wales "wikilink"). The
difference between Welsh clogging and other step-dance traditions is
that the performances do not only include complicated stepping, but also
'tricks' such as snuffing out a lit candle with the dancer's feet, *toby
stepping*, which is similar to Cossack dancing, and high leaps into the
air.

## Trivia

[The Cloggies](The_Cloggies "wikilink") was a long running cartoon strip
satirising Northerners. The cartoon popularised the existing use of
*cloggie* to refer to people from the Northern industrial areas,
particularly Lancashire.

Clog fighting, known in Lancashire as 'purring', was a
[combative](combative "wikilink") means of settling disputes. Clog
fighting and its associated betting by spectators was illegal.

The British expression "to pop his clogs" refers to a man dying. The
most probably explanation is that if dead his clogs could be "popped" or
[pawned](pawned "wikilink"), though some sources allow for the
possibility that "pop" may come from "to pop off" or "to pop off the
hooks", both meaning to die.

## Notes

## Footnotes

## References

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

## External links

-   [Atkinson video of clog
    making](https://web.archive.org/web/20151101003447/http://www.clogmaker.co.uk/index.html).
    [Rough cutting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jCQgkJJz_tI)
    [Hollowing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ER3NTg_E_IU)
    [Uppers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vgp4QqvaquI)
    [Clasps](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WcdvutX2yFA) [Clog and
    Pattern](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aYrw_9K8P9U)
-   [Walkley Clogs](http://www.clogs.co.uk), largest clog maker in the
    UK.
-   [Mike
    Cahill](https://web.archive.org/web/20160305081332/http://www.clogger.eu/),
    a brief history of clogging

[Category:Clogs (shoes)](Category:Clogs_(shoes) "wikilink")

[1] . Evidence of Sarah Valentine.

[2] . Evidence of Edwin Griffiths and Sarah Valentine.

[3] . Evidence of Ann Marshall.