![](Patent_court_shoes.jpg "fig:Patent_court_shoes.jpg"), worn with
[white tie](white_tie "wikilink") or [black tie](black_tie "wikilink")
attire.\]\]

A **court shoe** ([British English](British_English "wikilink")),
**coort shoe** ([Scottish English](Scottish_English "wikilink")), or
**pump** ([American
English](List_of_words_having_different_meanings_in_American_and_British_English:_M–Z#P "wikilink")),
is a [shoe](shoe "wikilink") with a low-cut front, or
[vamp](Shoe#vamp "wikilink"), and without a fastening. For the
traditional [formal](formal_wear "wikilink") menswear, the style is
sometimes called an **opera slipper** or **patent leather pump**.

The construction of pumps is simple, using a whole-cut leather top with
a low vamp, lined with either quilted silk or plain leather, trimmed
with braid at the opening. The full leather sole is either glued onto
the bottom, common on cheaper styles, or sewn, as on more costly bespoke
styles still made traditionally, using a shallow slit to lift a flap of
leather around the edge to recess and hide the stitching. The sole is,
as on ordinary shoes, several layers of leather put together. The bow is
made of grosgrain silk or [rayon](rayon "wikilink"), in a pinched or
flat form.

For women, pumps with a [strap](strap "wikilink") across the instep are
called [Mary Janes](Mary_Jane_(shoe) "wikilink"). Pumps may have an
ankle strap.

## Menswear

![](Man's_tailcoat_1825-1830.jpg "fig:Man's_tailcoat_1825-1830.jpg") In
the [Regency period](British_Regency "wikilink"), during the day
upper-class gentlemen in western Europe wore [dress
boots](dress_boot "wikilink"), and boots or pumps by night, which
accompanied silk knee-high stockings and breeches. The shoes originally
had silver cut-steel buckles, but these were removed by the influence of
[Brummell](Beau_Brummell "wikilink"),[1] and a square
[grosgrain](grosgrain "wikilink") bow was added. By Victorian times,
evening footwear was pumps when there would be dancing or music (hence
the name **opera shoe** or **opera slipper**), and patent leather dress
boots otherwise. Pumps remained as standard with evening [full
dress](full_dress "wikilink") until the 1930s.[2] At that time, the
dress boot was also going out of fashion, as laced shoes began to be
worn at all times.

Even though it now survives in much the same form as it was at the start
of the 19th century[3] (though it is occasionally now worn with plain,
not patent, calf), pumps have been largely displaced by
[Oxfords](Oxfords "wikilink"), perhaps because of an effeminate image
and the declining use of [white tie](white_tie "wikilink"). It remains
acceptable (though rare) with [black tie](black_tie "wikilink"), and,
since formal boots are now hardly ever worn, pumps are standard with
white tie, their only remaining common use. They are still preferred
with formalwear by many leaders of style.[4] The original versions worn
with steel cut buckles are still worn as part of [British court uniform
and dress](Court_uniform_and_dress_in_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink").

## Womenswear

![](Sibyllas_guldpumps_-_Livrustkammaren_-_49715.tif "fig:Sibyllas_guldpumps_-_Livrustkammaren_-_49715.tif")
![](Pumps_tillhörande_Louise_-_Livrustkammaren_-_75095.tif "fig:Pumps_tillhörande_Louise_-_Livrustkammaren_-_75095.tif")
Pumps for women are usually heeled. The shape has varied through time.
In the UK, a closed toe and wide (non-stiletto) heel have been worn by
the very fashion-conscious, but most still wore
[stilettos](Stiletto_heel "wikilink") of mainly ['kitten'
height](kitten_heel "wikilink") to medium height.

In the UK, outside the fashion trade, the term "pumps" would normally
imply flat or low-heel dancing or [ballerina
pumps](ballet_flat "wikilink"), or even rubber-soled canvas
[plimsolls](plimsoll_shoe "wikilink"). In the U.S., "pumps" exclusively
refers to women's shoes with a [kitten](kitten_heel "wikilink") or
higher [heel](Heel_(shoe) "wikilink").

Pumps can be made from any material, but traditional [patent
leather](patent_leather "wikilink") is popular. Pumps are mostly worn
with a suit or a uniform, but are also worn with formal and informal
dresses, skirts, trousers, and jeans. White, stiletto-heeled pumps are
the standard attire with swimsuits in beauty pageants.

Pumps are also part of the costume of a [ballroom
dancer](ballroom_dance "wikilink"). They are made of satin, usually tan,
though other colors are made as well, and worn on both the competition
and practice floors.

## References

## Bibliography

-

-

-

## External links

[Category:High-heeled
footwear](Category:High-heeled_footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Formal
wear](Category:Formal_wear "wikilink")

[1] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 143

[2] Flusser (2002). p. 251

[3] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 175

[4] Flusser (1985).[ch. 2](http://www.throughtherye.com/flusser/ch3.htm)