![](Arsen_5104_f14_detail2.jpg "Arsen_5104_f14_detail2.jpg")

**Crakows** or **crackowes** were a style of shoes with extremely long
toes very popular [in the 15th
century](1400–1500_in_fashion "wikilink"). They were so named because
the style was thought to have originated in [Kraków](Kraków "wikilink"),
then the capital of [Poland](Poland "wikilink"). They are also sometimes
known as poulaines or pikes,[1] though the term *poulaine*, as in
*souliers a la poulaine*, "shoes in the Polish fashion", referred to the
long pointed beak of the shoe, not the shoe itself.[2]

## History

Long toed shoes had been popular in Europe at different times, first
appearing in the archaeological record in the 12th century and falling
in and out of fashion periodically. They reached their most exaggerated
form in the third quarter of the 15th century before falling out of
fashion in the 1480s.[3][4]

The arrival of this fashion in England is traditionally associated with
the marriage of [Richard II](Richard_II "wikilink") and [Anne of
Bohemia](Anne_of_Bohemia "wikilink") in 1382. An anonymous 'monk of
Evesham' recorded in 1394: "With this queen there came from Bohemia into
England those accursed vices (English *Cracowys* or *Pykys*) half a yard
in length, thus it was necessary for them to be tied to the shin with
chains of silver before they could walk with them."

However, there are indications they were worn as early as the 1360s. The
author of the *Eulogium Historiarum* describes men of this period as
wearing "points on their shoes as long as your finger that are called
crakowes; more suitable as claws... for demons than as ornaments for
men."[5]

14th century poulaine-toed shoes found in London were found only in
men's sizes,[6] but 15th century art shows them being worn by both men
and women, with the toes of men's shoes being the most extravagantly
long. They were a controversial fashion and faced criticism from several
quarters. In 1368, [Charles V of France](Charles_V_of_France "wikilink")
issued an edict banning their construction and use in Paris. An English
poem from 1388 complained that men were unable to kneel in prayer
because their toes were too long.[7] In 1463, [Edward
IV](Edward_IV "wikilink") passed a [sumptuary
law](sumptuary_law "wikilink") restricting anyone "under the state of a
Lord, Esquire, \[or\] Gentleman" from wearing poulaines over the length
of two inches. In 1465, they were banned in England altogether, so that
all cordwainers and cobblers within the City of London were prohibited
from making shoes with pikes more than two inches long.[8]

The poulaine inspired later footwear fashions, such as the 1950s
[Winklepicker](Winklepicker "wikilink") boots.

## Features

### Stuffing

Poulaine toes were packed with stuffing to provide rigidity and help
them hold their shape. Surviving examples from medieval London have the
points stuffed with [moss](moss "wikilink").[9] An Italian chronicler
noted in 1388 that they were also sometimes stuffed with horsehair.[10]

### Tying up the toes

Although there is no archaeological or medieval iconographic evidence to
support the idea that the toes were ever tied up to the leg,[11] as
noted earlier, there is direct literary evidence dating from 1394 which
states that this was the practice at the time these shoes were
introduced into England. Additionally, the practice is mentioned by the
antiquarian [John Stow](John_Stow "wikilink") in his 1698 publication *A
Survey of London*, where he wrote:

However, given that John Stow was writing over 100 years after the shoes
fell out of fashion, and the lack of rigorous historical research in the
writings of the time, he cannot be considered a reliable source. His
record of Act 4 of Edward IV is exaggerated - the actual act does
mention restrictions in length, but not monetary penalties, parliament
or clergy:

![](2008-08_archeon_schnabelschuh.JPG "fig:2008-08_archeon_schnabelschuh.JPG")\]\]

### Poulaines as overshoes

Overshoes made from leather or cork, called
[pattens](pattens "wikilink"), were frequently worn with late medieval
shoes both indoors and outdoors. The shape of pattens reflected the
style of shoes in different periods, and pattens during the period where
poulaine toes were fashionable have matching long toes. These pattens
would have supported the toe of the shoes if required.

### Toe length

Archaeological evidence in the form of surviving shoe soles shows that
the length of the point beyond the toes of the foot was rarely, if ever,
more than 50% of the length of the foot.[12][13] This is consistent with
depictions of highly fashionable European men from the third quarter of
the 15th century when poulaine toes were at the height of their
popularity.

![](Sempach_Schilling.jpg "fig:Sempach_Schilling.jpg") in the [Luzerner
Schilling](Luzerner_Schilling "wikilink"), showing a large pile of
shoe-tips on a hill in the upper-left of the illustration (1513)\]\] As
with many items of high fashion the most extreme examples were worn by
the upper classes. In periods when poulaine toes were popular most shoes
were somewhat pointed, even those used during warfare. There is clear
evidence from the [Battle of Sempach](Battle_of_Sempach "wikilink") that
in certain periods soldiers on campaign wore shoes with toes so long as
to interfere with the wearer's ability to run. In that battle, it became
necessary for the knights of [Leopold III, Duke of
Austria](Leopold_III,_Duke_of_Austria "wikilink") to dismount and fight
on foot, and because they did not have time to prepare for the
engagement, they were forced to cut off the tips of their poulaines. The
Swiss chroniclers report how a huge pile of these shoe-tips was found in
a heap after the battle, and they are also depicted in the background of
the battle scene in the [Lucerne
Chronicle](Lucerne_Chronicle "wikilink") of 1513.

![](HJRK_A_62_-_Armoured_shoes_of_Maximilian_I,_1485.jpg "fig:HJRK_A_62_-_Armoured_shoes_of_Maximilian_I,_1485.jpg"),
c. 1485\]\] A surviving pair of [sabatons](sabatons "wikilink")
belonging to Emperor Maximilian have extremely long poulaines, but they
were used only on horseback and in this case the long points were
detachable from the sabatons for foot combat. The catches can be seen
over the area of the big toe.

## See also

-   [Pointed shoe](Winklepicker "wikilink")
-   [Venetian-style shoe](Venetian-style_shoe "wikilink")
-   [Pigache](Pigache "wikilink")
-   [Winklepicker](Winklepicker "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Historical
footwear](Category:Historical_footwear "wikilink") [Category:Polish
clothing](Category:Polish_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Medieval
costume](Category:Medieval_costume "wikilink") [Category:15th century in
Europe](Category:15th_century_in_Europe "wikilink")

[1]

[2] Carlson, I. Marc. 2001, ["Medieval European Long Toed
Shoes"](http://www.personal.utulsa.edu/~marc-carlson/shoe/APP5.HTM),
"Footwear of The Middle Ages", 2001

[3] Goubitz, Olaf; van Driel-Murray, Carol; Groenman-Van Waateringe,
Willy. 2001 "Stepping through time : archaeological footwear from
prehistoric times until 1800": Zwolle \[Netherlands\] : Stichting
Promotie Archeologie

[4] Grew, F. and de Neergaard, M. 1988. *Shoes and Pattens. Medieval
Finds from Excavations in London*: 2. London: HMSO, pp. 88–9.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]