**Cross country running shoes** are made for [cross country
running](cross_country_running "wikilink"), a form of [long distance
running](long_distance_running "wikilink"). Season-specific trainers are
available for different types of training.[1]

## Cross country running

Cross country races vary by length and terrain. They are most often run
at [5K](5000_meters "wikilink"), 6000 meters, 8000 meters,
[10K](10,000_meters "wikilink"), and 12,000 meters, though many races
for children are shorter. During training season, professional runners
can run anywhere from 40 to 120 miles each week, depending on
preference, training method, and ability to remain healthy. While the
impacts of differences among types of footwear may be minimal on a
single run, the cumulative effect on performance and health can provide
a competitive edge.[2] Races are held on surfaces including gravel,
grass, dirt or mud, sand, and asphalt (though racing on asphalt is not
normally recommended).

## Shoe types

When training, [trainers](trainers "wikilink") with support and
cushioning are recommended because unsupportive, uncushioned shoes can
potentially cause [repetitive stress
injuries](repetitive_stress_injuries "wikilink") if used over a long
period of time. For speed workouts, often held on tracks, lighter shoes
with less cushioning and support may be used.

Racing shoes are lighter (around 5 ounces) and have 4-6 spikes or
"pins", which help with traction on hills and wet terrain. They have
less cushion than trainers, are less supportive, and often utilize a
springy spike plate made of rubber or [Pebax](Pebax "wikilink").

## Comparisons

Cross country spikes are more robust than [track
spikes](track_spikes "wikilink"). They must deal with the elements more
and with natural objects, like sticks and rocks. The upper is thicker,
therefore, and can be [water-proof](water-proof "wikilink"). They often
have more cushioning and heel support because of the stress of downhill
running. In addition, they can have longer spikes (anywhere from 1/4 in.
to 5/8 in.) for better traction, as they are used on natural terrain
that are affected by weather and can include hills.

## Fitting

Specialist shops offer advanced fitting services. The feet change shape
and swell when running, so a shoe that fit while sitting or walking may
not work for running.[3]

## Preparing new shoes

When wearing new shoes for the first time, it is crucial to make sure
they are “broken in” by wearing them in undemanding situations,
(walking, slow running) to lessen the chance for injury.

## Potential injuries

Common running injuries include blisters, twisted ankles, knee injuries
and shin splints.

## References

[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Athletic
shoes](Category:Athletic_shoes "wikilink") [Category:Cross country
running](Category:Cross_country_running "wikilink")

[1] Runner's World & Running Times \|access-date=2012-12-26
\|archive-url=<https://web.archive.org/web/20121215134435/http://www.runnersworld.com/running-shoes/right-running-shoe-fit>
\|archive-date=2012-12-15 \|url-status=dead }}

[2]

[3]