![](Tire_Sandals.jpg "fig:Tire_Sandals.jpg")\]\]
![](Sandals_made_from_tires.jpg "fig:Sandals_made_from_tires.jpg") The
***dép lốp*** ([dép](:wikt:dép "wikilink") "sandal"
[lốp](:wikt:lốp "wikilink") "tire rubber") are a form of sandal in
Vietnam made from recycled tires. The sandals, along with the [khăn
rằn](khăn_rằn "wikilink") scarf, were a distinctive clothing of
Vietnamese soldiers.[1] These shoes were often called "Ho Chi Minh
sandals" by Americans.[2][3]

## References

[Category:Vietnamese words and
phrases](Category:Vietnamese_words_and_phrases "wikilink")
[Category:Vietnamese clothing](Category:Vietnamese_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Sandals](Category:Sandals "wikilink")
[Category:Tires](Category:Tires "wikilink")

[1] [Float to another place, minutes from the
City](http://vietnamnews.vnagency.com.vn/Travel/155235/float-to-another-place-minutes-from-the-city.html)
2006 "Further on the trip takes you to the famous Tunnels of Cu Chi
where you can visit spine-chilling war vestiges from the American War.
You can dress in the attire of a Vietnamese soldier from that time,
wearing ao ba ba (Vietnamese style blouse) and khan ran (black and white
checquered shawl), and even buy the famous infantry footwear – dep lop
(tire sandals)."

[2] Jeffrey K. Fozard Cw4 (Ret) Usa *Cleared to Land: Memoirs of an Army
Air Traffic Controller* - 2009 Page 70 "[Chieu
Hois](Chieu_Hoi "wikilink") building our bunker - While the Chieu Hois
were working on our bunker, I noticed the shoes one was wearing. I had
heard about them, but had never seen them before. He was wearing "Ho Chi
Minh sandals". They are shoes/sandals ..."

[3] Gordon L. Rottman *Viet Cong Fighter* Page 19 2007 Durable Ho Chi
Minh sandals, or what the VC called tire sandals <s>(dep no xe)</s>,
with truck-tire soles and inner-tube straps, were common. Flat-soled
canvas sneakers were also worn."