![](Espardenyes.jpg "Espardenyes.jpg")

**Espadrilles** or **espardenyes** are casual, flat, but sometimes
[high-heeled](High-heeled_footwear "wikilink")
[shoes](shoes "wikilink"). They usually have a
[canvas](canvas "wikilink") or [cotton](cotton "wikilink")
[fabric](Textile "wikilink") upper and a flexible
[sole](Sole_(shoe) "wikilink") made of [esparto](esparto "wikilink")
[rope](rope "wikilink"). The esparto rope sole is the defining
characteristic of an espadrille; the [uppers](Upper_(shoe) "wikilink")
vary widely in style.

![](Mare_de_Déu_de_la_Salut_15.jpg "fig:Mare_de_Déu_de_la_Salut_15.jpg")
celebrated in [Algemesí](Algemesí "wikilink")\]\]

## Etymology

The existence of this kind of shoe in [Europe](Europe "wikilink") is
documented since at least 1322, when it was described for the first time
with its current [Catalan](Catalan_language "wikilink") name.
![](Alpargatas_01.jpg "fig:Alpargatas_01.jpg")\]\] The term *espadrille*
is French and derives from the word in the [Occitan
language](Occitan_language "wikilink"), which comes from *espardenya* in
[Catalan](Catalan_language "wikilink") or *alpargata* and *esparteña* in
Spanish. Both *espardenya* and *esparteña* refer to a type of shoes made
with [esparto](esparto "wikilink"), a tough, wiry Mediterranean
[grass](grass "wikilink") used in making [rope](rope "wikilink").[1] Its
name in the Basque region is *espartina*.[2]

## History

![](Francesc_Galofré_i_Oller-_Un_model-_251.JPG "fig:Francesc_Galofré_i_Oller-_Un_model-_251.JPG")
Espadrilles have been made in [Occitania](Occitania "wikilink") region
(France) and all over [Spain](Spain "wikilink"), where they were the
usual peasant footwear since the 14th century at least, and are still
being produced as from old. The oldest, most primitive form of
espadrilles dates as far back as 4000 years ago . Traditional
espadrilles have a [canvas](canvas "wikilink") upper with the toe and
vamp cut in one piece and seamed to the rope sole at the sides. Often
they have laces at the throat that are wrapped around the ankle to hold
the shoes securely in place. Traditional espadrilles are worn by both
men and women.

## Modern espadrilles

Once [peasant](peasant "wikilink") [footwear](footwear "wikilink"), then
urban workers footwear, espadrilles have grown in popularity, especially
in the French Atlantic coast of the Basque Country and Spanish
Mediterranean coast from Granada to Girona, where many men and women
wear them during the spring and summer months. Designer espadrilles are
now widely available. They are usually manufactured in France, Spain and
South Asia. Modern espadrilles are predominantly for women, though some
men's shoes are made in this style.

The soles of espadrilles may be flat, platform, or wedge shaped made of
[natural fiber](natural_fiber "wikilink"). Uppers may be made from
nearly any substance and may have open or closed toes, open or closed
backs, and can be slip-on or tied to the ankle with laces. Thousands of
varieties of espadrilles can be found, from inexpensive bargain brands
to high priced designer brands.

Espadrilles became fashionable in the USA in the 1940s. [Lauren
Bacall](Lauren_Bacall "wikilink")'s character in the 1948 movie *[Key
Largo](Key_Largo_(film) "wikilink")* wore ankle-laced espadrilles.

Wedge shaped espadrilles were first popularized by French fashion
designer [Yves Saint Laurent](Yves_Saint_Laurent_(designer) "wikilink").
At a trade fair in Paris in 1970, he came into contact with the Spanish
espadrille manufacturer [Castañer](Castañer "wikilink"). Yves Saint
Laurent had been looking in vain for months for someone to make him a
wedge espadrille. Castañer managed to interpret Yves Saint Laurent's
vision and the wedge espadrilles were an instant hit, influencing
fashion even today.

The espadrille style was revived in the USA in the 1980s, due to the
success of *[Miami Vice](Miami_Vice "wikilink")*—the shoe was worn by
the character Sonny Crockett (played by [Don
Johnson](Don_Johnson "wikilink")). In 2013 at luxury shoe stores in New
York City, a pair of espadrilles could cost nearly $500.[3]

## Jute sole espadrilles

Due to cost and material availability, the soles of espadrilles are now
commonly made with jute rope or braid. The natural bright white color of
jute is a major design feature of modern espadrilles.

[Bangladesh](Bangladesh "wikilink") is the producer of high quality jute
and has become a manufacturing center for premium quality jute soles and
complete espadrilles.[4] Ninety percent of the world's total production
of complete espadrilles, as well as jute soles, is now manufactured in
Bangladesh, although some manufacturers in [Spain](Spain "wikilink"),
[France](France "wikilink"), and [Italy](Italy "wikilink") import jute
soles from Bangladesh to finish espadrilles in those countries. Complete
espadrilles are also assembled in [Argentina](Argentina "wikilink")
(known as alpargatas), [Bolivia](Bolivia "wikilink"),
[Chile](Chile "wikilink"), [Colombia](Colombia "wikilink"),
[Paraguay](Paraguay "wikilink") and [Venezuela](Venezuela "wikilink")
with imported jute from Bangladesh.

Jute soles typically include fully or partially vulcanized rubber
beneath the jute soles for long-lasting espadrille shoes. Sometimes
crepe soles are used as out-soles although those are not as durable
compared to vulcanized ones. Jute braid soles might include heels made
of wood or [EVA foam](EVA_foam "wikilink").

## Manufacture

![](Fabrication_de_la_semelle_d'espadrille.ogv "fig:Fabrication_de_la_semelle_d'espadrille.ogv")
The manufacture of espadrilles is generally more complex than that of
sandals. The jute soles are the most critical part. The jute twines are
first machine-braided. These braids are then manually formed into the
shape of the sole and [hydraulically](hydraulically "wikilink") pressed
with heat to form the final shape and completed with vertical stitching
with Espadrille Needles.[5] These basic soles are then
[vulcanized](vulcanized "wikilink") underneath. EVA foam or wooden
[heels](heel "wikilink") are glued in place and more jute braids are
wrapped around it to complete the soles. Uppers of different styles are
then built on the jute soles to complete the espadrille.

## See also

-   [Bast shoes](Bast_shoes "wikilink"), similar footwear in
    Balto-Slavic cultures of identical etymological derivation (from
    fibre used in their manufacture)

## References

[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink")
[Category:Sandals](Category:Sandals "wikilink") [Category:Folk
footwear](Category:Folk_footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Jute](Category:Jute "wikilink") [Category:Articles containing
video clips](Category:Articles_containing_video_clips "wikilink")

[1]

[2] [*Espartina* in the official website of the community of Soule
municipalities](http://www.soule-xiberoa.fr/eu/herri-alkargoa/herri-alkargoaren-egitasmueak/industriecommercesartisanat/mauleko-espartina-ateleria.html)

[3]

[4]

[5] Dritz ES50063