![](Ghillie.JPG "fig:Ghillie.JPG")
![](Ghillie_bw_1.JPG "fig:Ghillie_bw_1.JPG")

**Ghillies** are specially designed [shoes](shoe "wikilink") used for
several types of dance. They are soft shoes, similar to [ballet
shoes](ballet_shoes "wikilink"). They are used by women in [Irish
dance](Irish_dance "wikilink"), by men and women in [Scottish country
dance](Scottish_country_dance "wikilink"), and by men and women in
[Highland dance](Scottish_highland_dance "wikilink").

Ghillies are also sometimes known by a variety of other names that
include: light shoes, pomps, pumps, and soft shoes.

## Appearance and materials

Ghillies are soft shoes, almost always made of a supple
[leather](leather "wikilink") that forms to the foot. They use laces
which criss-cross the top of the foot and are tied together similar to a
sneaker. Most dancers use laces (required in competitions), although
some ghillies do utilize elastic. Some dancers will also wrap the
laces/elastics around the soles of the feet. The soles usually stretch
across the entire bottom of the shoe (full-soled) and are made from
leather. Some ghillies, however, are split-soled, with a leather sole
under the heel and under the ball of the foot. Ghillies are most
commonly black, although other colours (such as red, green, and white)
are manufactured. White ghillies can be dyed a variety of colours to be
used for costumes specially choreographed dances such as blue, red, pink
and others.

## Scottish ghillies

Scottish ghillies are used by men and women for Highland dancing and for
Scottish country dancing. They are almost always black, although they
often feature coloured stitching and eyelets. Highland ghillies, for
Highland dances, generally need to fit snugly but also need to be able
to get on the foot around thick socks or hose; for National dances they
fit snugly as they are worn with thin socks or stockings. They are
generally worn very tight in order to get a good point.

## Irish ghillies

Irish ghillies are used by women in [Irish
dancing](Irish_dancing "wikilink"), whereas men wear reel shoes. Unlike
Scottish ghillies, the Irish version rarely feature coloured stitching,
and they use loops in the leather, as opposed to eyelets, for the laces.
Irish ghillies are available in a solid tan leather sole and a split
sole.

## Comparison with ballet shoes

Like [ballet shoes](ballet_shoes "wikilink"), ghillies are generally
made from leather, and have similar soles. Many dancers who start in
Highland or Irish dancing will first use ballet shoes, as the cost is
considerably lower. The most easily recognizable difference between
ballet shoes and ghillies is that ghillies use laces to fasten them to
the foot, whereas ballet shoes generally use an elastic across the
ankle. Also the laces are very long, and are wrapped around the ankle
and foot before tied. Other differences are that ghillies do not have a
string/elastic around the edge of the shoe to tighten them, and the
soles of ghillies are not usually stitched on, but glued on.

## Other uses

-   Ghillies, or [ghillie brogues](brogues "wikilink"), are also a type
    of shoe with [laces](lace "wikilink") along the instep and no
    tongue, especially those used for [Scottish country
    dancing](Scottish_country_dancing "wikilink"). Although now worn for
    dancing and social events, ghillies originated as a shoe that would
    dry quickly due to the lack of a tongue, and not get stuck in the
    mud because of their laces above the ankle.
-   In a perhaps more recent and certainly competing shoe-related use,
    Ghillie has also been used to describe laced shoes where rings or
    loops that project over the tongue are attached to the upper as an
    alternative to the use of eyelets punctured in the upper; this style
    is often seen on [athletic shoes](athletic_shoe "wikilink").
-   Ghillies can also be used for other forms of dance, such as
    [lyrical](Lyrical_dance "wikilink").

## External links

-   [New Scotland Country Dance
    Society](https://web.archive.org/web/20100325203517/http://www.newscotland.org.uk/page/info/dance_equipment)

[Category:Dance shoes](Category:Dance_shoes "wikilink") [Category:Irish
dance](Category:Irish_dance "wikilink") [Category:Scottish country
dance](Category:Scottish_country_dance "wikilink") [Category:Sports
footwear](Category:Sports_footwear "wikilink") [Category:Scottish
Highland dances](Category:Scottish_Highland_dances "wikilink")