![](Louboutin_Pigalle_Follies_Suede_Paillette.gif "fig:Louboutin_Pigalle_Follies_Suede_Paillette.gif"))\]\]

**High heels** are a type of [shoe](shoe "wikilink") in which the heel,
compared with the toe, is significantly higher off the ground. These
shoes go beyond simply protecting the foot from the ground or improving
efficiency of walking. High heels make the wearer appear taller,
accentuating the [calf muscle](calf_muscle "wikilink") and the length of
the leg overall.[1] There are many types of high heels, which come in
different styles, colors and materials, and can be found all over the
world. They have significant cultural and fashionable meanings attached
to them, which have been largely shaped by historical contexts over the
past 1,000 years. Wearing high heels is associated with some health
problems.

## History

### Pre-1700s

![](Roper_Boot.jpg "fig:Roper_Boot.jpg")
![](Shoes_MET_54.61.74a-b_CP4.jpg "fig:Shoes_MET_54.61.74a-b_CP4.jpg")
High heels have a long history, dating as far back as the tenth century.
The [Persian](Persian_people "wikilink") [cavalry](cavalry "wikilink"),
for example, wore a kind of [boot](boot "wikilink") with heels in order
to ensure their feet stayed in the stirrups. Furthermore, research
indicates that heels kept arrow-shooting riders, who stood up on
galloping horses, safely on the horse.[2] This trend has translated into
the popular 21st-century [cowboy boot](cowboy_boot "wikilink"). Owning
horses was expensive and time-consuming, so to wear heels implied the
wearer had significant wealth.[3] This practical and effective use of
the heel has set the standard for most horse-back riding shoes
throughout history and even into the present day. Later, in the 12th
century in [India](India "wikilink"), heels become visible again. The
image of a statue from the [Ramappa Temple](Ramappa_Temple "wikilink")
proves this, showing an Indian woman's foot clad in a raised shoe. Then,
during the [Medieval period](Middle_Ages "wikilink"), both men and women
wore platform shoes in order to raise themselves out of the trash and
excrement filled streets.[4] In 1430, *[chopines](chopine "wikilink")*
were high, at times. [Venetian](Republic_of_Venice "wikilink") law then
limited the height to three inches—but this regulation was widely
ignored.[5] A 17th-century law in
[Massachusetts](Massachusetts "wikilink") announced that women would be
subjected to the same treatment as witches if they lured men into
marriage via the use of high-heeled shoes.[6]

### 1700s

![](Rigaud_Louis_XIV_1701.jpg "fig:Rigaud_Louis_XIV_1701.jpg") in high
heels\]\] Modern high heels were brought to Europe by
[emissaries](Persian_embassy_to_Europe_(1609–15) "wikilink") of [Shāh
Abbās I of Persia](Abbas_I_of_Persia "wikilink") in the early 17th
century.[7] Men wore them to imply their upper-class status; only
someone who did not have to work could afford, both financially and
practically, to wear such extravagant shoes. Royalty such as [King Louis
XIV](Louis_XIV_of_France "wikilink") wore heels to impart status. As the
shoes caught on, and other members of society began donning high heels,
elite members ordered their heels to be made even higher to distinguish
themselves from lower classes.[8] Authorities even began regulating the
length of a high heel's point according to social rank. Klaus Carl
includes these lengths in his book *Shoes*: "½ inch for commoners, 1
inch for the bourgeois, 1 and ½ inches for knights, 2 inches for nobles,
and 2 and ½ inches for princes."”[9] As women took to appropriating this
style, the heels’ width changed in another fundamental way. Men wore
thick heels, while women wore skinny ones. Then, when
[Enlightenment](Age_of_Enlightenment "wikilink") ideals such as science,
nature, and logic took hold of many European societies, men gradually
stopped wearing heels.[10] After the [French
Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink") in the late 1780s, heels,
femininity, and superficiality all became intertwined.[11] In this way,
heels became much more associated with a woman's supposed sense of
impracticality and extravagance.

![](18th_century_shoes_mules.jpg "fig:18th_century_shoes_mules.jpg") The
design of the high French heels from the late 1600s to around the 1720s
placed body weight on the ball of the foot, and were decorated with lace
or braided fabric (pictured). From the 1730s-1740s, wide heels with an
upturned toe and a buckle fastening became popular. The 1750s and 1760s
introduced a skinnier, higher heel. The 1790s continued this trend, but
added combinations of color. Additionally, throughout all of these
decades, there was no difference between the right and left shoe.[12]

In Britain in 1770, an act was introduced into the
[parliament](Parliament_of_Great_Britain "wikilink") which would have
applied the same penalties as witchcraft to the use of high heels and
other cosmetic devices.[13]

### 1800s

![](Wilson_Sewing_Machine_1850.jpg "fig:Wilson_Sewing_Machine_1850.jpg")
Heels went out of fashion starting around 1810, and then in 1860 they
returned at about two and a half inches. The Pinet heel and the Cromwell
heel were both introduced during this time.[14] Their production was
also increased with the invention and eventual mass production of the
[sewing machine](sewing_machine "wikilink") around the 1850s. With
sewing machines, yields increased as machines could quickly and cheaply
"position\[n\] the heel, stitc\[h\] the upper, and attac\[h\] the upper
to the sole."[15] This is also a prime example of how the popularity of
heels interacts with the culture and technology of the time.

### 1900s

![](Betty_Grable_20th_Century_Fox.jpg "fig:Betty_Grable_20th_Century_Fox.jpg")
([Betty Grable](Betty_Grable "wikilink")) in high heels\]\] With the
1900s bringing two devastating world wars, many countries set wartime
regulations for rationing almost all aspects of life. This included
materials previously used for making heels, such as silk, rubber, or
leather; these began to be replaced with cork and wooden soles.[16]
Another one of the numerous outcomes of these wars was an increase in
international relations, and a more proliferate sharing of fashion
through photography and films, which helped spread high heel fashion as
well.[17] Examples of this were the brown and white pumps with cutouts
or ankle straps combined with an open toe.[18] Their practicality yet
professional look appealed to the new, fast-paced lifestyle of many
women.

Alternatively, [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink") led to the
popularization of [pin-up girl](pin-up_girl "wikilink") posters, which
men would often hang in their bunks while at war. Almost all of these
girls were pictured wearing high heels, leading to an increase in the
relationship between high heels and female sexuality.[19] The tall,
skinny stiletto heel was invented in 1950, strengthening the
relationship between women, sexuality, and appearance.[20] There was a
weakening of the stiletto style during both the late 1960s / early 1970s
and also 1990s when block heels were more prominent, followed by a
revival in the 2000s.

### 21st century

The intricate and complex history of high heels has led to a variety of
cultural thoughts and lens through which people view them today.
Firstly, it is very exclusively gendered in the sense that few men wear
high heels in present times.[21] Secondly, magazines like
*[Playboy](Playboy "wikilink")*, as well as other media sources
portraying women in a sexual way, often do so using high heels. Paul
Morris, a psychology researcher at the [University of
Portsmouth](University_of_Portsmouth "wikilink"), argues that high heels
accentuate "sex specific aspects of female gait", artificially
increasing a woman's femininity.[22] Respectively, the arching of a
woman's back facilitated by wearing high heels signals a woman's
willingness to be courted by a man.[23][24] Keeping this sexual
undercurrent in mind, heels are considered fashionable for women in most
cases. It could be semi-formal with a "button down silk blouse…jeans and
high heels."[25] Or, it could be formal with a dress or [pants
suit](pants_suit "wikilink"). Finally, 20th and 21st century cultural
values have dictated that high heels are the norm in professional
settings for a woman. Some researchers argue that high heels have even
become part of the female workplace uniform, and operate in a much
larger and complex set of display rules.[26] High heels are considered
to pose a dilemma to women as they bring them psychosexual benefits but
are detrimental to their health.[27] The 21st century has introduced a
broad spectrum and variety of styles, ranging from height and width of
heel, to design and color of the shoe.

## Types

![](High_heels_(1).jpg "High_heels_(1).jpg")

-   Stacked heel – usually layers of leather 5 mm thick stacked together
    and trimmed to match the shape of the heel.[28] These are commonly
    known as block heels.
-   Continental heel – 7.5 mm, with the upper part of the chest of the
    heel spreading towards the center of the shoe.[29]
-   Setback heel – similar to the continental heel, but the surface of
    the back of the heel is straight, forming a right angle.[30]
-   Cuban heel – similar to the continental heel, but not curved,
    generally medium height[31]
-   Pantaloon heel – "similar to pantaloon pants: the top lift part of
    the heel is spread out as it extends to the bottom part of the heel,
    and the waistline of the heel is curves inward naturally."[32]
-   Angle heel – "the surface of the base of the heel is straight until
    reaching the waistline, and it looks like the shape of the Korean
    letter ¬"[33]
-   Pinet heel – straight and skinny[34]
-   Cromwell shoe – based on [Oliver
    Cromwell](Oliver_Cromwell "wikilink") with heel up to .[35]
-   Bar Style – had jewelry or other decorative aspects to go along with
    flapper culture.[36]
-   New Look in 1947 – a slim/elegant heel, newly discovered by putting
    steel in the heel. This enabled the heel to be ultra skinny without
    snapping.[37]
-   Annabelle – 7 cm platform heel[38]
-   Stiletto – Tall, skinny heel; first mentioned in a newspaper in
    September 1953.[39]
-   Wedges - These were popularized by [Salvatore
    Ferragamo](Salvatore_Ferragamo "wikilink"), who introduced this in
    the Italian market in the late 1930s.

### Materials

High heels have been made from all kinds of materials throughout
history. In the early years, leather and cowhide was preferred. As
civilizations progressed, silk and [patent
leather](patent_leather "wikilink") were introduced, while cork and wood
were utilized as cheap resources in times of war.[40] After the World
Wars and the increase in production of [steel](steel "wikilink"), the
actual heel was a piece of steel wrapped in some kind of material. This
has enabled designers to make heels taller and skinnier without them
snapping.[41] The soles below the ball of the foot of Ballroom shoes can
also be made of materials like smooth leather, suede, or plastic. [42]

## Health impacts

![](Achilles-tendon.jpg "Achilles-tendon.jpg")

### Injury and pain

Wearing high-heeled shoes is strongly associated with injury, including
injury requiring hospital care. There is evidence that high-heel-wearers
fall more often, especially with heels \>2.5cm high,[43] even if they
were not wearing high heels at the time of the fall.[44] Wearing high
heels is also associated with [musculoskeletal
pain](musculoskeletal_pain "wikilink"),[45] specifically pain in the
paraspinal muscles (muscles running up the back along the spine) and
specifically with heel pain and plantar calluses (only women
tested).[46]

A 2001 survey conducted by researchers from Pennsylvania State
University using 200 women found that 58% of women complained of lower
back pain when wearing heels and 55% of women said they felt the worst
overall back pain when wearing the highest heel.[47] The researchers
explained that as heel height increases, the body is forced to take on
an unnatural posture to maintain its center of gravity. This changed
position places more pressure and tension on the lower lumbar spine
which explains why the women complained of severe back pain at a higher
heel length.

In a 1992 study, researchers from the University of California, Davis
and Thomas Jefferson University wanted to investigate the effects of
increased heel height on foot pressure using forty-five female
participants walking across a pressure plate in various heel
heights.[48] A Biokinetics software was used to analyze the exact
pressure locations on and along each participants' foot. The researchers
were able to conclude that an increase in heel height lead to an
increase in pressure beneath each of the [Metatarsal
bones](Metatarsal_bones "wikilink") of the foot. Additionally, they
found that the highest heel heights caused constant pressure that could
not be evenly dispersed across the foot.
![](Metatarsal_bones03.png "fig:Metatarsal_bones03.png") In a 2012
study, Kai-Yu Ho, Mark Blanchette and Christopher Powers, wanted to
determine if heel height increased patellofemoral joint stress during
walking.[49] The patellofemoral joint refers to junction where the femur
and patella meet. The study consisted of eleven participants wearing
tracking and reflective markers as they walked across a 10 meter force
plated walkway in low, medium and high heels. The study showed that as
the height of the heel increased, the ball of the foot experienced an
increase in pressure resulting in increased discomfort levels and peak
patellofemoral joint stress. The researchers also mentioned that the
long term usage of high heels would lead to repetitive overstress of the
joint which would result in an increase in pain and eventually,
patellofemoral joint osteoarthritis and [Patellofemoral pain
syndrome](Patellofemoral_pain_syndrome "wikilink").

In a 2012 study, researchers examined the risk long time high heel
wearers would have in regards to calf [Muscle
fascicle](Muscle_fascicle "wikilink") length and strain.[50] The control
group consisted of women who wore heels for less than ten hours weekly
and the experimental group consisted of women who wore heels for a
minimum of forty hours weekly for at least two years. The experimental
group was told to walk down a walkway barefoot and in heels while the
control group walked down barefoot as cameras recorded their movements
to calculate muscle fascicle lengths. The data showed that wearing heels
shortened the length of the medial
[gastrocnemius](Gastrocnemius_muscle "wikilink") (MG) muscle fascicles
in the calf significantly as well as increasing stiffness in the
[Achilles Tendon](Achilles_tendon "wikilink"). The experimental group
also demonstrated a larger amount of strain on the muscle fascicles
while walking in heels because of the flexed position the foot is forced
into. The researchers were able to estimate that when wearing heels, the
estimated fascicle strains were approximately three times higher and the
fascicle strain rate was approximately six times higher. Additionally,
they were able to conclude that the long term usage of high heels can
increase the risk of injuries such as strain along with discomfort and
muscle fatigue.

### Bunions

![](VerbildeteFusseNormaleFusse.gif "fig:VerbildeteFusseNormaleFusse.gif")es[51]
which do not fit around the toes, but displace them from their natural
position.\]\] Wearing high-heeled shoes is associated with developing
[bunions](bunions "wikilink"), a deformity of the foot.[52][53]

### Balance control of the body

In 2016, scientists from the Department of Physical Therapy in the
Sahmyook University in Korea conducted a study to examine the effects of
increased heel height and gait velocity on balance control.[54] Balance
control refers to the ability of the body to maintain itself along the
line of the center of gravity within a base of support. This must be
achieved with minimal postural sway velocity which is the horizontal
movement of a body trying to maintain balance when standing still.
Wearing high heels narrows the base of support that the body has in
order to avoid falling and also restricts the area within which the body
must sway. In this study, the participants were told to wear either a
low or high heel and walk at a low and high speed on a treadmill. As a
result of this experiment, the researchers were able to conclude that as
heel height increased, the sway velocity of the bodies increased which
also modified the position of the knee joint. Muscles have to realign
the entire body especially the hips along the line of gravity. As the
weight of the body shifted forward, the hips were taken out of alignment
and the knee joints experienced stress in order to adjust to the shift.

### Postural effects

![](Spinal_column_curvature-en.svg "fig:Spinal_column_curvature-en.svg")
In a 2016 study from the Sahmyook University in Korea, researchers
wanted to investigate the effects of high heels on the activation of
muscles in the [cervical](Cervical_vertebrae "wikilink") and
[lumbar](lumbar "wikilink") portions of the spine which refers to the
neck and lower back.[55] Thirteen women were recruited to walk down a
walkway in three different testing conditions: barefoot, in 4 cm heels
and in 10 cm heels. Surface electrodes were placed on the muscle mass of
the women’s spines as well as their feet to measure the electrical
activity of muscles at different points of movement. The results of the
study indicated an increase in both cervical and lumbar muscle
activation as heel height increased. The cervical spine, the neck,
assists in maintaining head stability and postural control in the body.
The usage of high heels shifts the body’s center of mass which forces
the spine to adjust itself in order to maintain balance. The researchers
mentioned that over time these results would increase local muscle
fatigue that could lead to muscle swelling, decreased muscle movement
and even tissue deformation.

### Vein swelling

Further research reveals that another possible consequence of wearing
high heels is an increase of pressure in one's veins. Experiments have
proven that the higher the heel, the "higher \[the\] venous pressure in
the leg." This means that after repeated use of high heels, [varicose
veins](varicose_veins "wikilink") and other undesirable symptoms are
much more likely to appear in the legs.[56] Other research supports
these two claims when arguing that wearing high heels can lead to
numerous long term effects, including accidental trauma to multiple
areas of the body.[57]

## Legislation

In [Carmel-by-the-sea](Carmel-by-the-sea "wikilink"), California, heels
over 2 inches high, with less than one square inch of bearing surface,
can be worn only with a permit.[58]

It has been argued that high heels in the workplace should be subject to
a health and safety assessment.[59]

## Feminism

Research shows that heels draw attention to long legs and small feet.
Some argue that "high-heeled shoes, perhaps more than any other item of
clothing, are seen as the ultimate symbol of being a woman."[60] High
heels often play a key role in emphasizing a wearer's, most commonly a
woman's, arched back and extended buttocks. This "natural courting pose"
sexualizes the wearer, and can turn them into objects subjected to the
[male gaze](male_gaze "wikilink").[61] This research highlights the
emphasis heels place on the appearance of the wearer, instead of their
arguably more valuable internal traits such as intelligence, creativity,
or strength.

It has not been popular for men to wear high heels since the late 18th
century.[62] Some men see the cultural norm, which often mandates that
women must wear heels to look professional, as completely
unproblematic.[63] However, women report that they are often painful to
walk in,[64] and commonly result in negative side effects to joints and
veins after prolonged use.[65]

At the feminist [Miss America protest](Miss_America_protest "wikilink")
in 1968, protestors symbolically threw a number of feminine products
into a "Freedom Trash Can." These included high-heels,[66] which were
among items the protestors called "instruments of female torture"[67]
and accouterments of what they perceived to be enforced
[femininity](femininity "wikilink").

In 2015, a group of women were turned away from a film première at the
[Cannes Film Festival](Cannes_Film_Festival "wikilink") in France for
wearing flat shoes, including a woman physically unable to wear heels
due to an operation on one of her feet.[68] The women complained that
this was a sexist policy which forced women into a stereotyped
appearance; festival organisers later responded that there was no
official policy on footwear and stated that they would remind red carpet
officials of this.[69][70]

### Dress codes

Some dress codes require women to wear high heels, and some medical
organizations have called for a ban on such dress codes.[71] There have
been repeated protests by women workers against such policies. Laws
regarding dress codes that require women to wear high heels in the
workplace vary.

In the UK in 2016 temporary receptionist [Nicola
Thorp](Nicola_Thorp "wikilink") was sent home unpaid after she refused
to follow the dress code of firm [Portico](Portico "wikilink"). Thorp
launched an online petition calling for the UK government to "make it
illegal for a company to require women to wear high heels at work".[72]
Two parliamentary committees in January 2017 decided that Portico had
broken the law; by this time the company had already changed its terms
of employment.[73][74] The petition was rejected by the government in
April 2017 as they stated that existing legislation was "adequate".[75]
Existing legislation allows women to be required to wear high heels, but
only if it is considered a job requirement and men in the same job are
required to dress to an "equivalent level of smartness".[76]

In April 2017 the Canadian province of [British
Columbia](British_Columbia "wikilink") amended workplace legislation to
prevent employers from requiring women to wear high heels at work.[77]
Other Canadian provinces followed suit.[78]

[The Philippines](The_Philippines "wikilink") forbade companies from
mandating that female employees wear high heels at work in September
2017.[79]

The [#KuToo](#KuToo "wikilink") campaign in Japan collected over 150,000
signatures on a petition[80] for a ban on mandatory high heels. The
government said that they had no plans to change.[81] Japan's labor
minister commented that high heels are "necessary and appropriate" for
women.[82]

### A Mile in Her Shoes

![](A_mile_in_her_shoes_121016-A-LH369-003.jpg "fig:A_mile_in_her_shoes_121016-A-LH369-003.jpg")
**A Mile in Her Shoes** is a march in which men wear red high heels and
walk a mile in protest of [domestic
violence](domestic_violence "wikilink"). Some academics have suggested
that by wearing high heels for such a brief period of time, and making a
point of acting like they do not know how to walk properly in them,
these men are reinforcing the stereotype that only women can or should
wear high heels.[83]

## Children

![](Mary_Janes_on_display_in_Carrefour_Fuzhou_Powerlong_(20170124170220).jpg "fig:Mary_Janes_on_display_in_Carrefour_Fuzhou_Powerlong_(20170124170220).jpg")
for sale in [Fuzhou](Fuzhou "wikilink")\]\] High heels are marketed to
children, and some schools encourage children to wear them.[84] 18% of
injuries from wearing high heels were in children, and 4% in under-tens,
in a 2002-2012 US survey.[85] Concern was expressed about children's use
of high heels in a 2016 medical review on high-heeled shoes.[86] A
nine-year old is about half an adult's height, and a toddler about a
quarter; so, relative to body height, a 2-inch (5 cm) heel on an adult
would be a one-inch heel on the nine-year-old, and a half-inch heel on
the toddler,[87] though whether this translates to comparable health
harms is not known.[88]

## Dancing

### Styles of Dance that use Heels

![](Ladies'_ballroom_shoes,_Tango_Shoes_1.jpg "fig:Ladies'_ballroom_shoes,_Tango_Shoes_1.jpg")
Many styles of dance involve the usage of heels.
[Ballroom](Ballroom_dance "wikilink") dancing shoes are designed for
usage based on the style of dance being performed. International
Standard Ballroom shoes for women are closed toed shoes with a 2 to 2.5
inch sturdy heel because steps are performed using the heel of the
foot.[89] International Latin and American Rhythm shoes are open toed,
strapped heels that are an average of 2.5 to 3 inches in height. These
shoes have the least sturdiest heel because International Latin and
American Rhythm styles are performed on the ball of the foot.
Additionally, this style of shoe is designed with a flexible sole to
allow for pointed feet. Lastly, American Smooth shoes are closed toed,
flexible soled shoes that range in heel height from 2 to 2.5 inches. An
additional non-traditional ballroom dance that uses heels is the
[Argentine Tango](Argentine_tango "wikilink"). While dancing the
Argentine Tango, women often wear pointed heels ranging in 2 to 4 inches
in height.[90] The higher the heel height, the more advanced in
technique and ability a dancer is. The heels are used to change the
overall stance of the woman by tilting the hips forward, making the
stomach flatter and pushing the backside out. Additionally, the heels
cause unsteadiness which forces women to dance on their toes and lean on
their partner which adds to the fluidity of the movements. A relatively
modern style of dance called Heels Choreography or [Stiletto
dance](Stiletto_dance "wikilink") specializes in choreography that
blends the styles of [jazz](Jazz_dance "wikilink"),
[hip-hop](Hip-hop_dance "wikilink") and
[burlesque](burlesque "wikilink") with the fusion of vogue movements and
is performed using stilettos or high heels.[91] Some
[dancers](dancers "wikilink") such as [Yanis
Marshall](Yanis_Marshall "wikilink") specialize in dancing with
high-heels.[92]

### Injuries

An analysis of the dance-related injuries in 113,084 adolescents in US
emergency rooms from 1991–2007 was conducted using data from the
National Electronic Injury Surveillance System.[93] The most common
injury found among the data were sprains and strains which accounted for
52.4% of the data. Additional injuries include
[back](Back_pain "wikilink") and leg pain, loss of joint
[mobility](Range_of_motion "wikilink") in the wearer's
[knees](Knee "wikilink") and blisters. In particular, shoes with a
narrow [space for the toes](toebox "wikilink") can squeeze tightly
enough to cause [foot deformity](foot_deformity "wikilink").[94] Dancers
can add cushioning to the soles of their dancing shoes or inserts to
ease the pain during dancing.[95]

## See also

-   [Desert boots](Desert_boot "wikilink")
-   [Elevator shoes](Elevator_shoes "wikilink")
-   [Fashion boots](Fashion_boot "wikilink")
-   [Foot binding](Foot_binding "wikilink")
-   [High heel policy](High_heel_policy "wikilink")
-   [Insolia](Insolia "wikilink")
-   [Locomotor effects of shoes](Locomotor_effects_of_shoes "wikilink")
-   [Platform boots](Platform_boot "wikilink")
-   [Pointed shoe
    (disambiguation)](Pointed_shoe_(disambiguation) "wikilink")
-   [Removable heel](Removable_heel "wikilink")
-   [Riding boots](Riding_boots "wikilink")
-   [Thigh-high boots](Thigh-high_boot "wikilink")

## References

## External links

[High-heeled_footwear](Category:High-heeled_footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink")
[Category:Footwear](Category:Footwear "wikilink")

[1] Han, Dongwook. "Muscle Activation of Paraspinal Muscles in Different
Types of High Heels during Standing." *Journal of Physical Therapy
Science*, vol. 27, no. 1, 2015, pp. 67–9., <doi:10.1589/jpts.27.67>.

[2] Kremer, William. "Why did Men Stop Wearing High Heels?" *BBC World
Service.* 26 Jan 2013.

[3] Trufelman, Avery. "Feet of Engineering." *99% Invisible.* Jun 2014.

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] Wade, Lisa. "From Manly to Sexy: The History of the High Heel" *The
Society Pages.* 5 Feb 2013.

[9] Carl, Klaus. *Shoes*. New York, Parkstone International, 2011.
*EbscoHost.*

[10]

[11]

[12] Blanco F José, et al., editors. *Clothing and Fashion : American
Fashion from Head to Toe*. Santa Barbara, California, ABC-CLIO, an
Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC, 2016. Print.

[13]

[14] Shawcross, Rebecca. "High Heels." *The Berg Companion to Fashion.*
Ed. Valarie Steele. Oxford: Bloomsbury Academic, 2010. Web.

[15]

[16] Stabb, Jo Ann. "The Early 20th Century Through World War II"
*Clothing and Fashion: American Fashion from Head to Toe,* edited by
Jose Blanco, vol. 3 ABC-CLIO, pp. 330-332. *Gale Virtual Reference
Library.*

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25] "Women's Dress and Fashion, 1980-Present" *Clothing and Fashion:
American Fashion from Head to Toe,* edited by Jose Blanco, vol. 4
ABC-CLIO, pp. 321-325. *Gale Virtual Reference Library.*

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41] Schwartz, Jessica. "Stiletto Heels." *Clothing and Fashion:
American Fashion from Head to Toe,* edited by Jose Blanco, vol. 4: The
Postwar Period into the 21st century, ABC-CLIO, pp. 281-282. *Gale
Virtual Reference Library.*

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56] Filho, Wagner, Nei Dezzotti, Edvaldo Joviliano, Takachi Moriya,
Carlos Piccinato. "Influence of High-Heeled Shoes on Venous Function in
Young Women." *Journal of Vascular Surgery,* vol. 56, Oct 2012.

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63] Reynaud, Bérénice. "These Shoes Are Made for Walking." *Afterall: A
Journal of Art, Context and Enquiry*, no. 6, pp. 42–51. 2002.

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78] National Post
\|url=<https://nationalpost.com/news/canada/alberta-takes-steps-to-ban-mandatory-high-heels-in-the-workplace>
\|accessdate=11 November 2019 \|work=National Post \|date=30 November
2018 \|language=en-CA}}

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82] [High heels at work are necessary, says Japan's labour
minister](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/jun/05/high-heels-at-work-are-necessary-says-japan-labour-minister)
The Guardian, 2019

[83] Bridges, Tristan. "Men Just Weren't Made to do This: Performances
of Drag at 'Walk a Mile in Her Shoes' Marches." *Gender and Society*,
vol. 24, no. 1, 2010, pp. 5–30. *JSTOR*.

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]