**Hunter Boot Ltd.** is a rubber [Wellington
boot](Wellington_boot "wikilink") and footwear brand. Originally
established as **North British Rubber Company** in 1856, the company is
headquartered in [Edinburgh](Edinburgh "wikilink").
[Scotland](Scotland "wikilink"). It also has offices in London, New York
and Düsseldorf.[1] Besides rubber boots, it sells other products such as
[bags](Handbag "wikilink"), [socks](socks "wikilink"), and other
accessories. It previously made [tyres](Tire "wikilink"), [conveyor
belts](conveyor_belt "wikilink"), [combs](hair_comb "wikilink"), [golf
balls](golf_ball "wikilink"), [hot water
bottles](hot_water_bottle "wikilink") and rubber
[flooring](flooring "wikilink"). Hunter holds several [Royal Warrants by
Appointment](Royal_Warrant_of_Appointment_(United_Kingdom) "wikilink")
as suppliers of waterproof footwear.[2]

Green Wellington boots, now manufactured in China,[3] are its best known
product.

## History

### Beginnings

In early January 1856 Henry Lee Norris, an
[American](United_States "wikilink")
[entrepreneur](entrepreneur "wikilink") from [Jersey City, New
Jersey](Jersey_City,_New_Jersey "wikilink"), and his friend and partner
Spencer Thomas Parmelee of [New Haven,
Connecticut](New_Haven,_Connecticut "wikilink"), landed in
[Scotland](Scotland "wikilink") to work a patent of [Charles
Goodyear](Charles_Goodyear "wikilink") for the manufacture of
India-rubber overshoes and boots.[4] They landed in Glasgow and began by
searching for a suitable factory, which they eventually found at the
[Castle Mill](Fountainbridge "wikilink") in
[Edinburgh](Edinburgh "wikilink"). A fine pair of condensing steam
engines and boilers were included in the lease, which they were able to
take up almost immediately due to the mill's partial occupation at the
time. The pair were ready to begin operations in the midsummer of 1856.
Originally the company was named **Norris & Co.**, which existed until
the first [limited liability](limited_liability "wikilink") act was
introduced to [Great Britain](Great_Britain "wikilink") - the **North
British Rubber Company** (which much later became known as **Hunter Boot
Ltd**) was registered as a limited liability company in September
1857.[5]

Norris was eventually succeeded at the company by William Erskine
Bartlett, who arguably invented what is considered to be the accepted
type of car tyre today. Around 1907, the fledgling British
[Dunlop](Dunlop_Rubber "wikilink") tyre company bought the 'Bartlett'
patent from the North British Rubber Company for US$973,000, in order to
acquire the rights to manufacture and distribute tyres under the same
name. It is estimated that, today, the patent would be worth more than
US$200,000,000.

The company made not only rubber boots but also tyres, conveyors, combs,
golf balls, hot water bottles and rubber flooring. In the beginning
there were only four people working for the company; by 1875 the team
had grown to a 600. The company had offices in Edinburgh, London and New
York.

### World War I and II

Production of Wellington boots was dramatically boosted with the advent
of [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink") when the company was asked by
the War Office to construct a sturdy boot suitable for the conditions in
flooded [trenches](trenches "wikilink"). The mills ran day and night to
produce immense quantities of these trench boots. In total, 1,185,036
pairs were made to cope with the [Army's](army "wikilink") demands. The
Wellington boot was envied by German soldiers during World War I and its
dependability was seen to contribute to the British army's success.[6]

For [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), the company was again
called upon to supply vast quantities of
[Wellington](wellington_boot "wikilink") and thigh boots. Eighty percent
of production was for war materials - from ground sheets to life belts
and gas masks. In the [Netherlands](Netherlands "wikilink"), forces were
working in flooded conditions which demanded Wellingtons and tight boots
in vast supplies.

By the end of the war, the Wellington had become popular among men,
women and children for wear in wet weather. It had become far roomier
with a thick [sole](Sole_(shoe) "wikilink") and rounded
[toe](toe "wikilink"). Also, with the [rationing](rationing "wikilink")
of that time, labourers began to use them for daily work.

### Post-war

After World War II, boot making had to move to a larger factory in
Heathhall, [Dumfries](Dumfries "wikilink"), to deal with the rise in
demand. The factory was originally built for
[Arrol-Johnston](Arrol-Johnston "wikilink") (later Arrol-Aster), a
Scottish [automobile](automobile "wikilink") manufacturer, in 1913,
before the company was liquidated in 1931.[7] This is said to be the
first car factory in Britain to use
[ferro-concrete](ferro-concrete "wikilink") (concrete reinforced with
metal bars), and was designed by [Albert
Kahn](Albert_Kahn_(architect) "wikilink").[8]

The company's most famous Wellington, the "Original Green Wellington",
was first made in the winter of 1955. It was the first
[orthopaedic](orthopaedic "wikilink") boot made by Hunter, and was
launched alongside the Royal Hunter - another boot that remained in
Hunter's range in 2012.[9] Reaction from trade was slow, and an order of
36 pairs considered an achievement. However, the company persisted,
taking them to county shows and trade fairs. Thought of as more
up-market than the traditional black Wellington of the time, the
'Original' tended at first to be worn by middle- to upper-class rural
people, who are still sometimes referred to as the 'Green Welly
Brigade'.

![](Hunter_rainboots.jpg "Hunter_rainboots.jpg")

### 1966-2005: Ownership changes

In 1966, North British Rubber was bought by Uniroyal Limited of
[Greenville, South Carolina](Greenville,_South_Carolina "wikilink").
Formerly known as the U.S. Rubber Company, Uniroyal is best known for
car tyres and still operates today.[10] In 1976, having continued to
supply boots to the royal households, Hunter was awarded a [Royal
Warrant](Royal_Warrant_of_Appointment_(United_Kingdom) "wikilink") from
the [Duke of Edinburgh](Prince_Philip,_Duke_of_Edinburgh "wikilink").
This was shortly followed by another from the
[Queen](Elizabeth_II "wikilink") in 1986. By this time, a pair of Hunter
boots had become an essential item for those guided in upmarket country
fashion. By the end of the 1980s, they were synonymous with the much
caricatured figures of the [Sloane Ranger
Handbook](Sloane_Ranger "wikilink").

In 1986 Uniroyal was bought by the **Gates Rubber Company** of [Denver,
Colorado](Denver,_Colorado "wikilink"). From the beginning of 1987, the
company was known under the name of its new owner. It entered the
drysuit market shortly after the takeover by Gates, at its peak becoming
the number two producer in the market with a 35% market share. Its
fortunes continued to improve over the next ten years until, in 1996,
Gates Corporation, formerly known as The Gates Rubber Company, became a
wholly owned subsidiary of **Tomkins plc**, ending 85 years of ownership
by the Gates family. Tomkins paid a reported £366m for the stake.[11] At
that time, Gates was the largest non-tyre rubber company in the
world.[12]

Intent on strengthening its positions in its core engineering markets,
Tomkins began to dispose of a number of businesses during the period
1998-2001. In 1999, it sold the Consumer and Industrial Division of The
Gates Rubber Company to **Interfloor**, the country's largest carpet
underlay manufacturer. The company became the Hunter Division of
Interfloor.

In early 2004, a management-led investor group acquired the Hunter Boots
business of Interfloor Group Ltd for £1.98m in a leveraged buyout
transaction.[13] For the first time, Hunter became an independent
company under its own name, specifically, the **Hunter Rubber Company**.

At the end of 2004, Hunter announced that they would be releasing a
range of seven different coloured Wellingtons to celebrate the 50th
anniversary of the Green Wellington Boot. Each different coloured boot,
along with the kids' range, represented one of eight charities and were
used to raise funds for them.[14] The company launched a dedicated
website,
[www.giving-welly.co.uk](https://web.archive.org/web/20170516131825/http://giving-welly.co.uk/),
to this purpose, and raised over £250,000 for charity.

Hunter launched several extensions to the Wellington range in mid-2005.
Along with developing boots under licence for the [Royal Horticultural
Society](Royal_Horticultural_Society "wikilink"), the Lady Northampton
riding boot, combining a molded waterproof rubber and canvas upper, was
also added to extend from the company's traditional all-rubber
Wellington boot range.

### 2006: Administration and buy-out

In 2006, the Hunter Rubber Company was placed into
[administration](Administration_(law) "wikilink") due to cash flow
problems. In spite of a reported turnover of over £5m, accountants from
[KPMG](KPMG "wikilink") said the firm suffered from high manufacturing
costs, including fuel costs, and made a loss from the expansion of its
business to the [United States](United_States "wikilink"). According to
documents filed with Companies House, Hunter reported a loss of £600,000
from September 2003 to the end of February 2005, when it had a net debt
of £2.03m.[15][16]

A [private consortium](consortium "wikilink") led by [Lord Marland of
Odstock](Jonathan_Marland,_Baron_Marland "wikilink") and comprising
Peter Mullen, ex [CEO](CEO "wikilink") of [Thomas
Pink](Thomas_Pink "wikilink"), and Julian Taylor, all of whom were
previous shareholders in Hunter Rubber Company, supported by the
Pentland Group plc, bought Hunter out of administration and **Hunter
Boot Ltd** was born.[17] After rapid re-structuring of the company, new
supply routes and distribution partners were found in the UK and USA and
the Hunter portfolio was rationalised to core products exhibiting the
key skills and tradition of the company.

Hunter regained a large market share of the traditional country and
leisure footwear market in the UK after the buy-out, and positioned
itself as a strong contender in the USA - opening showrooms on 7th
Avenue in New York and Regent Street in London.[18] A new management
team retained many of the staff from Hunter Rubber.

In November 2006, Hunter Diving Ltd - the arm of Hunter Rubber that was
responsible for manufacturing drysuits - was sold to Swedish rival
company Trelleborg Group for an undisclosed sum.[19]

### 2007-present

![](Modern_Hunter_wellington_boot.gif "fig:Modern_Hunter_wellington_boot.gif")
Spring 2007 saw the relationship between Hunter and the [Royal
Horticultural Society](Royal_Horticultural_Society "wikilink") further
strengthened by the launch of a new range of RHS boots at the [Chelsea
Flower Show](Chelsea_Flower_Show "wikilink") in London in May.[20]
Hunter also set up the 'Century' Division to handle its global range of
safety boots, and to develop new products in this sector. A little over
a year later, Century Safety was acquired by the [Tigar
Corporation](Tigar_Corporation "wikilink") for an undisclosed sum.

Hunter Boot Ltd enjoyed a record season in summer 2007 announcing, in
August, an 85% sales increase against the same period in 2006[21]
Despite this, Hunter remained faced with major financial challenges
regarding production. High manufacturing and fuel costs that contributed
to the company's move into administration in 2006 remained prominent
and, like many UK [manufacturing](manufacturing "wikilink") businesses,
Hunter was forced to consider whether it was worth manufacturing in the
UK. The company also had to negotiate a volatile relationship with its
landlord and an expensive and inefficient 96-year-old factory.
Eventually, alternative supply sources were sought and developed in
Europe and the Far East and plans were made to leave the
[Dumfries](Dumfries "wikilink") plant and move the company
[HQ](Headquarters "wikilink") to [Edinburgh](Edinburgh "wikilink").[22]
This move was finally made in September 2008. The Chinese made gumboots
look like the original Scottish made gumboots apart from the addition of
an internal seam. Some manufacturing efficiencies have also been made
including the removal of the latex dipping process, making the boots
virtually identical to those from many other manufacturers.

Hunter formed many relationships and collaborations with other brands in
2008, further extending its reach into the US, festival and fashion
markets, while also contributing strongly to charity organisations. It
produced versions of the classic Hunter Original boot for [Jack
Wills](Jack_Wills "wikilink"), [WaterAid](WaterAid "wikilink"),[23]
[Cowshed](Cowshed "wikilink")[24] and [Fortnum &
Mason](Fortnum_&_Mason "wikilink"),[25] as well as a trench coat
designed by Suzy Radcliffe, owner of denim brand **Radcliffe**.[26]

In September 2008, following the [2008
Olympics](2008_Olympics "wikilink") in [Beijing,
China](Beijing,_China "wikilink"), Hunter Boot Ltd sent specially made
gold Wellington boots to every member of the [Great
Britain](Great_Britain "wikilink") Olympic team who won a gold medal at
the games.[27]

In January 2009, Hunter announced that it would be collaborating with
the fashion designer [Jimmy Choo](Jimmy_Choo "wikilink") for a limited
edition black Wellington boot, embossed with Jimmy Choo crocodile print
and containing gold rivets and a leopard-print lining. Another boot was
then launched in 2011.[28][29]

Hunter has since seen strong growth with international distribution in
over 30 countries. However, some observers feel the quality of the
products have suffered over recent years and the brand has seen a number
of negative comments regarding quality posted on website reviews.

The Hunter boot tooling from the Scottish factory, and the manufacturing
technique, is now used in Eastern Europe (Serbia) by Tigar Footwear and
the products are marketed as Century Boots.

In 2012, [Searchlight Capital
Partners](Searchlight_Capital_Partners "wikilink"), with headquarters in
Europe and North America, became the new controlling shareholder in
Hunter Boot Ltd.[30]

In 2013, Alasdhair Willis was appointed [Creative
Director](Creative_director "wikilink")[31][32] and two new brand
categories Hunter Original and Hunter Field were introduced. The launch
of Hunter Original has seen four pioneering catwalk shows at [London
Fashion Week](London_Fashion_Week "wikilink") showcasing new footwear,
outerwear and accessories alongside the Original boot. Hunter Field is a
technical collection. Introduced in SS15, a new Hunter Field logo was
developed in Field Green to differentiate the two brands. [33] The
Balmoral Field boot is a technical style and features a Newflex Vibram
outsole for extended use.[34]

In 2014, Hunter opened its first global flagship on London's Regent
Street. The award-winning store takes inspiration from the brand's
heritage presenting the full Hunter Original, Hunter Field and Hunter
Kids collections over three floors. In the same year, magician Steven
Frayne, also known as [Dynamo](Dynamo_(magician) "wikilink"), worked
with Hunter to become an integral part of their [London Fashion
Week](London_Fashion_Week "wikilink") show. Frayne appeared to levitate
and then made models, including [Suki
Waterhouse](Suki_Waterhouse "wikilink"), vanish in front of the crowd
which included [Stella McCartney](Stella_McCartney "wikilink") and [Anna
Wintour](Anna_Wintour "wikilink").[35][36][37] In 2015, in collaboration
with Checkland Kindleysides, Hunter won Best Store Concept at the VM
Excellence Awards. A second global flagship was opened in the
[Ginza](Ginza "wikilink") district of [Tokyo](Tokyo "wikilink") in
2016.[38] In 2016, Hunter launched the Duke of Wellington by Hunter
Field collection, a range of all-purpose equestrian outerwear and
footwear.[39] Vincent Wauters was appointed CEO.[40] [41] Hunter
continues to be chosen by festival goers the world over, and is
particularly synonymous with the mud-filled Glastonbury Festival. [Kate
Moss](Kate_Moss "wikilink") first wore her Original Tall boots to
Glastonbury in 2005, while recent years have seen [Alexa
Chung](Alexa_Chung "wikilink") in the Original Chelsea Boot, Cara
Delevingne wearing the Original Backpack and [Niall
Horan](Niall_Horan "wikilink") in Hunter Original outerwear.[42]

In 2016, Hunter launched its Core collection,[43] a range of
weatherproof Hunter icons in an array of colors. "Rain Starts Play" was
coined as a hashtag for the launch.[44]

## See also

-   [Mackintosh](Mackintosh "wikilink")
-   [Gumboot Day](Gumboot_Day "wikilink")
-   [William's Wish Wellingtons](William's_Wish_Wellingtons "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Hunter Boot Ltd Official Website](http://www.hunter-boot.com/)
-   [The Hunter Original
    Boot](https://web.archive.org/web/20130710025946/http://www.hunter-boot.com/original-green)

[Category:Shoe companies of the United
Kingdom](Category:Shoe_companies_of_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Companies based in
Edinburgh](Category:Companies_based_in_Edinburgh "wikilink")
[Category:Clothing companies of
Scotland](Category:Clothing_companies_of_Scotland "wikilink")
[Category:Manufacturing companies based in
Edinburgh](Category:Manufacturing_companies_based_in_Edinburgh "wikilink")
[Category:British companies established in
1856](Category:British_companies_established_in_1856 "wikilink")
[Category:Clothing companies established in
1856](Category:Clothing_companies_established_in_1856 "wikilink")
[Category:1856 establishments in
Scotland](Category:1856_establishments_in_Scotland "wikilink")
[Category:Clothing companies of the United
Kingdom](Category:Clothing_companies_of_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")
[Category:Shoe brands](Category:Shoe_brands "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3] [*www.telegraph.co.uk*: Hunter Boots owner Lord Marland looks for
new
prey](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/retailandconsumer/4623668/Hunter-Boots-owner-Lord-Marland-looks-for-new-prey.html)

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]