![](Jika-tabi.jpg "Jika-tabi.jpg")

is a type of outdoor [footwear](footwear "wikilink") worn in
[Japan](Japan "wikilink"). It was invented in the early 20th century.
Also known (outside Japan) as "tabi boots", they are modelled on *tabi*,
traditional split-toe [Japanese](Japan "wikilink") socks. Like other
tabi, jika-tabi have a divided toe area so that they can in theory be
worn with slip-on thonged footwear, but they are heavy-duty, and
resemble [boots](boot "wikilink").

Tokujirō Ishibashi, a brother of [Shōjirō
Ishibashi](Shōjirō_Ishibashi "wikilink") who is the founder of the major
tire company [Bridgestone Corporation](Bridgestone "wikilink"), is
credited with their invention.

## In Japan

![](Two-toed_(4734956163).jpg "fig:Two-toed_(4734956163).jpg")\]\]
![](New_steel-toed_tabi_boots,_home,_Burbank,_California,_USA_(29855620640).jpg "fig:New_steel-toed_tabi_boots,_home,_Burbank,_California,_USA_(29855620640).jpg")
Being made of heavy, tough material and often having rubber soles,
jika-tabi are often used by construction workers, farmers and gardeners,
[rickshaw](Pulled_rickshaw "wikilink")-pullers, and other workmen.

Though slowly being replaced by steel-toed, rigid-sole shoes in some
industries, many workers prefer them for the softness of their soles.
This gives wearers tactile contact with the ground, and the concomitant
gripping ability lets them use their feet more agilely than rigid-soled
shoes allow. This is useful for workers who traverse girders on
construction sites and need to be sure what is under their feet.
Carpenters and gardeners wearing these boots can, if they wish, use
their feet as an extra pair of hands, for example to hold objects in
place. There is also a line of knee-high all-rubber jika-tabi that is
used by workers in rice fields and/or wet and muddy environments.

In more recent years, jika-tabi manufacturers, like Marugo and Rikio
have introduced the "steel toe" and "hard resin" versions which are
approved by the Japan Occupational Safety and Health Resource Center
(JOSHRC).

A variation on the jika-tabi, called the [matsuri](matsuri "wikilink")
tabi, is so called because it is most commonly worn during festivals. It
differs from the regular jika-tabi in having extra cushioning for the
sole.

## In other countries

Outside Japan, where they are available from online and martial-arts
shops, jika-tabi are appreciated by practitioners of the martial art of
[Bujinkan](Bujinkan "wikilink") budo taijutsu, especially when training
outdoors. Other people also like wearing them for certain kinds of
[exercise](exercise "wikilink"), specifically
[trail-running](Cross_country_running "wikilink"),
[walking](walking "wikilink"), and [climbing](climbing "wikilink").

In recent years, jika-tabi have been seen in Hollywood movie
productions. Examples include *[The
Wolverine](The_Wolverine_(film) "wikilink")*, *[47
Ronin](47_Ronin_(2013_film) "wikilink")*, *[Big Hero
6](Big_Hero_6_(film) "wikilink")*, *[Star
Trek](Star_Trek_(film) "wikilink")*, and *[Thor: The Dark
World](Thor:_The_Dark_World "wikilink")*. Also worn in short movie
*[Anima](Anima_(Thom_Yorke_album) "wikilink")* from [Thom
Yorke](Thom_Yorke "wikilink") (2019).

## World War II

During the 1942 [Battle of Milne Bay](Battle_of_Milne_Bay "wikilink") in
[Papua](Territory_of_Papua "wikilink") (now part of [Papua New
Guinea](Papua_New_Guinea "wikilink")), the [Allies of World War
II](Allies_of_World_War_II "wikilink") first saw Japanese *[Kaigun
Tokubetsu Rikusentai](Kaigun_Tokubetsu_Rikusentai "wikilink")* (Special
Naval Landing Forces) in action. The distinctive boot tread pattern of
the jika-tabi shoes used by the Japanese special forces was helpful to
the Allies (mostly [Australian](Australia "wikilink") troops with some
[American](America "wikilink") units) during the rout and mopping up
operation, as it was easy to identify and follow through the muddy
forests. Examples of the boots are held by the [Australian War
Memorial](Australian_War_Memorial "wikilink").[1]

## References

## External links

-   [What Are Ninja
    Shoes?](https://web.archive.org/web/20120331202415/liveshoes.com.ua/ninja-shoes/what_ninja_shoes/)
    (*liveshoes.com.ua*, in Russian, archived link)

{{-}}

[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Japanese
footwear](Category:Japanese_footwear "wikilink")

[1] [WWII Japanese 'otherworldly' jika-tabi boots on display at
Australian War
Memorial](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-09-26/japanese-jika-tabi-boots-at-war-memorial/8987806),
Louise Maher, [ABC News Online](ABC_News_Online "wikilink"), 2017-09-26