![](Bates_enforcer_paratrooper_boots.jpg "Bates_enforcer_paratrooper_boots.jpg")

**Jump boots** are standard footgear for
[Paratroopers](Paratrooper "wikilink") and [Airborne
Forces](Airborne_Forces "wikilink") featuring calf-length lacing and
rigid toe caps. The style is a type of [combat
boot](combat_boot "wikilink") and versions were developed in many
countries simultaneously with the adoption of airborne infantry forces
during [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"). Modern jump boots are
earned in some countries and therefore have become a mark of achievement
and distinction, mainly worn as dress and parade boots. The uppers are
generally made of smooth black leather with toe-caps and heel counters
that accept a high polish ("[spit-shine](Bull_polishing "wikilink")" or
"spittle-shine"). It is also a paratrooper tradition to lace jump boots
in a *ladder* or *cobweb* style[1][2][3][4] which increases ankle
support during a parachute jump.

## Description

Although there is considerable variation in the features of modern jump
boots, the defining characteristics of the original US M1942 "Boots,
Parachute Jumper" (as popularized by the Corcoran Boot Company during
World War II) are extended lacing from the instep to the calf and rigid,
reinforced toe caps;[5] these features were intended to give greater
support to the wearer's ankles and toes during the rough landings
routinely experienced by [paratroopers](paratroopers "wikilink"). The
most common US combat boots of the World War II era (the M1939 "Shoes,
Service, Composition Sole") had non-reinforced uppers and only laced to
just above the ankle, requiring the use of separate
[leggings](leggings "wikilink") or [puttees](puttee "wikilink") to
provide support and prevent mud and dirt from entering the boot.
Although less flexible than the lighter standard issue boot—and
therefore often less comfortable when [marching](marching "wikilink"),
especially when cold or not well broken in—such specially reinforced
footwear was seen as a practical necessity, as upwards of 30% of
paratroopers were expected to suffer lower extremity injuries during a
combat jump. Leggings were also considered to present a risk of
entanglement with [parachute](parachute "wikilink") risers.

## Users

### Germany

During WW2, the [Fallschirmjäger](Fallschirmjäger "wikilink") wore jump
boots with side lacing. Side laced boots were also used by Czechoslovak
Paratroopers after 1945.

### Brazil

Brazilian Paratroopers wear brown leather jump boots manufactured by
Atalaia.

### Netherlands

Dutch Paratroopers were issued the M57 Jump Boot from 1958 to 1976. They
were a dark brown leather and had stitched soles.

### Portugal

Jump Boots in Portugal are manufactured by Proheral[6] and are laced in
the aforementioned distinctive style.[7][8] While these boots are
sometimes worn by non-paratroopers in Portugal, only paratroopers wear
them with surplus green paracord instead of the usual black lace. On
parade, they are usually worn with white paracord.

### Spain

In Spain they are referred to as BRIPAC boots (Spanish: BOTAS MARCA
IMEPIEL, DE LA BRIPAC) They lack the triple buckles which are worn by
other soldiers for safety reasons, as a parachute could get dangerously
hooked on them. They are also slightly higher, providing more shin,
ankle, and foot support, and have reinforced toes and heels.

### Italy

Italian Paratroopers are issued the **stivaletti combattimento esercito
italiano mod. 2000**. These usually come in a dark brown/black leather
and soles may vary. French paratroopers of the 1950s worn the very
similar "Bottes de saut Mle 50". The only differences between the
Italian and French models are the heel and in the outsole tread
patterns.

### United Kingdom

During WW2, the British Army issued trial copies of
[Fallschirmjäger](Fallschirmjäger "wikilink") type side laced boots in
the early days of the Parachute Regiment but they were not adopted. A
high version of the standard ammo boot was trialled with an extra cuff
with eyelets added to the top of the boot. They were also fitted with
thick crepe rubber soles. Once again though trialled, they were not
adopted.

### United States

[William P. Yarborough](William_P._Yarborough "wikilink") initially
designed the boots in 1941 for use in the 501st Parachute Test
Battalion.[9] Also known as **paratrooper boots,** or "Corcorans" after
The Corcoran And Matterhorn Company, a division of Cove Shoe Company,
which had the exclusive Department of Defense contract to artifice and
supply them for years.[10][11] This design is still in production.[12]
Jump boots with zippers were not authorized for wear by US Forces.
Certain US Army soldiers, notably those parachute qualified and assigned
to an Airborne/Special Forces unit, are authorized to wear jump boots
with [dress uniforms](Dress_uniform#U.S._Army "wikilink").[13]

A modified version of the paratrooper boot was issued to [U.S.
Navy](Uniforms_of_the_United_States_Navy "wikilink") personnel working
on flight decks and Aircrewmen. This variation of the jump boot featured
a steel-toe and zig-zag pattern on the out-sole designed to prevent
gathering *FOD,* or **F**oreign-**O**bject **D**ebris, that could
potentially damage aircraft by being sucked into the jet engine's
intake. These boots were sometimes colloquially referred to as
"wing-walkers." Generally they were black in color, but a brown version
was issued to Flight Officers. This style is no longer issued, but is
still generally authorized to wear with most Navy working uniforms (i.e.
NWUs, coveralls, Aviation Working Greens).

## References

-

-   [Paratrooper
    boots](https://web.archive.org/web/20141216221313/http://cartalana.com/0037-boots.php)

[Category:Military boots](Category:Military_boots "wikilink")
[Category:Military
parachuting](Category:Military_parachuting "wikilink")
[Category:Paratroopers](Category:Paratroopers "wikilink")
[Category:Military uniforms](Category:Military_uniforms "wikilink")
[Category:High-heeled
footwear](Category:High-heeled_footwear "wikilink")

[1] Reglamento de Uniformes y Divisas del Ejercito y Fuerza Aerea
Mexicanos EDICIONES ATENEO 1970

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] Lemons, Charles. "Uniforms of the US Army Ground Forces 1939-1945,
Volume 6, Footwear." . p62.

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9] [1](http://www.armytimes.com/issues/stories/0-ARMYPAPER-3469382.php)

[10] <http://www.corcoranandmatterhorn.com/ItemDisplay.asp?Style=1500&CategoryID=34>

[11]

[12]

[13] Army Regulation 670-1, Paragraph 27-3, Section C, Item 3.