![Jutti shoes](Jutti.jpg "fig:Jutti shoes") The **jutti** () or *Punjabi
Jutti* () is a type of [footwear](footwear "wikilink") common in [North
India](North_India "wikilink") and neighboring regions. They are
traditionally made up of [leather](leather "wikilink") and with
extensive embroidery, in real gold and silver thread as inspired by
Indian royalty over 400 years ago. Prior to that, Rajputs of the
northwest used to wear leather juttis.[1] Now with changing times
different juti with [rubber](rubber "wikilink")
[soles](Sole_(shoe) "wikilink") are made available. Besides Punjabi
jutti, there are various local styles as well. Today
[Amritsar](Amritsar "wikilink") and [Patiala](Patiala "wikilink")
("tilla jutti") are important trade centers for handcrafted juttis, from
where they are exported all over the world to [Punjabi
diaspora](Punjabi_diaspora "wikilink").[2][3][4] Closely related to
[mojaris](mojari "wikilink"). Juttis have evolved into several localized
design variations, even depending upon the shoemaker. However by large,
they have no left or right distinction, and over time take the shape of
the foot. They usually have flat sole, and are similar in design for
both women and men, except for men they have a sharp extended tip,
*nokh* curved upwards like traditional mustaches, and are also called
*khussa*, and some womenâ€™s juttis have no back part, near the ankle.
Even with changing times juttis have remained part of ceremonial attire,
especially at weddings, the unembellished juttis are used for everyday
use for both men and women in most of Punjab mostly called Jalsa Jutti
which is blackish in color.[5]

Many Punjabi folk songs mention juttis, like *Jutti kasuri peri na poori
hai rabba sanu turna paiy* and ''Jutti lagdi vairia mere'.[6]

## Overview

![](Punjabi_jutti_at_Dilli_Haat.jpg "fig:Punjabi_jutti_at_Dilli_Haat.jpg")
There is a wide variety of juttis (pronounced 'jeut-tii' in Punjabi or
'jeu-tea' in Hindi/Urdu) available for both men and women. During
certain festivals special juttis are also fitted to the feet of cows.
Elsewhere in India, Juttis are commonly also known as
[Mojari](Mojari "wikilink") or while an alternative name in Pakistan is
*khussa*, and they are now very popular in the West too. Like Mojaris,
these are long shoes with the end curled upwards.They have been
traditionally handed over generations with each generation contributing
some variation to it. These are the traditional ethnic Indian Footwear.

They are usually made of fine [leather](leather "wikilink") and are
delicately [embroidered](embroider "wikilink") with threads or
[beads](bead "wikilink"). Juttis are slip-on in style and are
characterized by rising high to the [Achilles'
tendon](Achilles'_tendon "wikilink") in the back and covering the
[toes](toes "wikilink") with a round or M-shaped heavily-embroidered
upper shoe and leaving the top of the foot nearly bare. Some of them are
handmade and have been embroidered beautifully.

It is believed that one of the earliest examples of footwear worn on the
Indian subcontinent is a sandal of wood, datable to circa 200 BC. During
the 3rd and 4th Centuries in the Buddhist period, it was quite common to
wear strapped sandals, and Indian kings wore sandals ornamented with
precious jewels. Jain literature shows that leather was used for the
making of shoes, which protected the toes from getting injured. Hides of
cows, buffaloes, goats, sheep and other wild animals were used.[7]

These ethnic shoes were worn by wealthy
[zamindars](zamindar "wikilink"), [chaudhary](chaudhary "wikilink"),
[nawab](nawab "wikilink"), [jagirdars](jagirdars "wikilink")
[Maharajas](Maharajas "wikilink") and Maharanis of India (esp. Punjab),
various designs showcased in this category are inspired from the [Mughal
era](Mughal_era "wikilink"). All these are handmade by skilled artisans
in remote corners of India. Jutti is the traditional
[Indian](Indian_people "wikilink") footwear popular in [North
India](North_India "wikilink"), especially in
[Punjab](Punjab,_India "wikilink"), [Haryana](Haryana "wikilink") and
[Rajasthan](Rajasthan "wikilink"). It also has slightly different
variations which are known as kussa or mojri. Beauty, vibrant color and
utility are combined in these juttis of India. Rich golden threads and
colorful beads are used to craft exquisite motifs in order to impart a
royal touch on these juttis made of different shades of leather. People
prefer wearing them on traditional occasions like weddings. Along with
traditional dresses like [sherwani](sherwani "wikilink") or kurta
pajama, juttis form the quintessential accessory.

## See also

-   [Mojari](Mojari "wikilink") - similar shoe from same region
-   [Turban training centre](Turban_training_centre "wikilink") -turban
    academies opened everywhere in Punjab which teaches the art of
    modern turban tying with various styles like Morni Dastar, Patiala
    Shahi

## References

<references />

## External links

-

[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Indian
footwear](Category:Indian_footwear "wikilink") [Category:Pakistani
footwear](Category:Pakistani_footwear "wikilink") [Category:Punjabi
culture](Category:Punjabi_culture "wikilink") [Category:Punjabi
Dress](Category:Punjabi_Dress "wikilink") [Category:Indian leather
industry](Category:Indian_leather_industry "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7] Feet and Footwear in Indian Culture, Jutta Hindu-Neubauer, Bata Shoe
Museum Foundation, Toronto, Canada, in association with Mapin Publishing
Pvt. Ltd., p.171.