![](Cizme_dama_Lady-Shoes.ro.jpg "fig:Cizme_dama_Lady-Shoes.ro.jpg")
**Knee-high boots** are [boots](boot "wikilink") that rise to the
[knee](knee "wikilink"), or slightly thereunder or over. They are
generally tighter around the [leg](human_leg "wikilink") shaft and
[ankle](ankle "wikilink") than at the top. Originally made of leather,
versions made of a [synthetic rubber](synthetic_rubber "wikilink") (PVC,
[Neoprene](Neoprene "wikilink"), etc.), they are used by fishermen,
dairy workers, stable hands, duck hunters, clammers, etc. to protect the
feet from water, mud, manure, etc. and to provide traction on slippery
surfaces. Most slip on, but there are varieties with buckles and those
that lace up.

Knee-high boots are used in the [fashion](fashion "wikilink") world
since at least the 1950s. The [fashion boot](fashion_boot "wikilink")
article discusses this in depth.

Certain types can also be known as **muckers** or **fishing boots**.

![](Seniorboots.jpg "fig:Seniorboots.jpg")\]\]

In university [ROTC](ROTC "wikilink") units, some members wear a dress
boot reminiscent of a [mounted cavalry](mounted_cavalry "wikilink")
boot, such as the boots worn by seniors in the [Texas A&M University
Corps of Cadets](Texas_A&M_University_Corps_of_Cadets "wikilink"). The
[leather](leather "wikilink") slip-on boots may be accented with
[spurs](spur "wikilink") or tassels, or be relatively unadorned. The
boots are custom-fit by a [cordwainer](cordwainer "wikilink") who takes
a mold of the legs of the intended wearer to create a
[last](last "wikilink") for the bootmaking process. The unique pair of
boots are then carefully sewn onto [soles](sole_(shoe) "wikilink").

Such boots may be extremely difficult to remove, necessitating the use
of [talcum powder](talcum_powder "wikilink") for lubrication, fellow
cadets to manually pull the boot, and for elaborate [boot
pullers](boot_puller "wikilink").

## See also

-   Varieties of knee-high boots (excluding fashion boots):
    -   [Motorcycle boots](Motorcycle_boots "wikilink")
    -   [Riding boots](Riding_boots "wikilink")
    -   [Wellington boots](Wellington_boots "wikilink")
    -   [Jackboot](Jackboot "wikilink")
    -   [Go-go boot](Go-go_boot "wikilink")
-   Other boot heights:
    -   [Over-the-knee boot](Over-the-knee_boot "wikilink")
    -   [Thigh-high boots](Thigh-high_boots "wikilink")

[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Safety
clothing](Category:Safety_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Knee
clothing](Category:Knee_clothing "wikilink")