**Magnetic boots** are [boots](boot "wikilink") that are
[magnetic](Magnetism "wikilink"), which allows them to attach to the
[ferrous](ferrous "wikilink") floor or [hulls](Fuselage "wikilink") of a
[spacecraft](spacecraft "wikilink") during
[weightlessness](weightlessness "wikilink"), and presumably would allow
someone to walk around the [cabin](Aircraft_cabin "wikilink") of a
spacecraft, but they would still feel weightless.

## Use by astronauts

Magnetic boots have not yet been used in actual space flight. Astronauts
on the International Space Station use foot straps to stand in place at
workstations or on exercise equipment.[1]

## Use in science fiction

Although many [science fiction](science_fiction "wikilink") works assume
some type of [artificial gravity](artificial_gravity "wikilink") or use
[rotation](rotation "wikilink") to "create" gravity, magnetic boots
still feature for purposes of exterior repairs or in
[emergency](emergency "wikilink") situations.

Magnetic boots were notably used in *[Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered
Country](Star_Trek_VI:_The_Undiscovered_Country "wikilink")* to stage a
surprise attack by disabling the artificial gravity on a ship and so
providing a [tactical](military_tactics "wikilink") advantage to
attackers wearing them. The investigation of who had access to magnetic
boots featured prominently in the plot. Other [Star
Trek](Star_Trek "wikilink") depictions include *[Star Trek: First
Contact](Star_Trek:_First_Contact "wikilink")* where the crew battle
[cyborgs](cyborgs "wikilink") on the hull of the ship and *[Star Trek:
Enterprise](Star_Trek:_Enterprise "wikilink")* where they are used for
hull repairs.

Such boots were featured in *[The Adventures of
Tintin](The_Adventures_of_Tintin "wikilink")* comic *[Explorers on the
Moon](Explorers_on_the_Moon "wikilink")*, to prevent the characters from
floating around in the cabin if the artificial gravity failed.

The Celestial Voyages historical science fiction series by Jeff Provine
uses magnetic boots as the main sense of balance in its Edwardian
starships.

In the *[Ratchet & Clank series](Ratchet_&_Clank_series "wikilink")*,
one of the gadgets is a pair of "Magneboots", which are used to traverse
special ventilation shafts in the first installment of the series
*[Ratchet & Clank](Ratchet_&_Clank "wikilink")*. Though in *[Ratchet &
Clank: Going Commando](Ratchet_&_Clank:_Going_Commando "wikilink")* and
later, the Magneboots were replaced with the Gravity Boots, allowing one
to walk up special vents and surfaces, to jump and walk like normal, and
also to use weapons and other gadgets.

In *[2010: Odyssey Two](2010:_Odyssey_Two "wikilink")*, it is stated
that Soviets view artificial gravity as a luxury, and as such their
vessel the *Alexi Leonov* features very limited artificial gravity. The
crew uses magnetic shoes to easily walk around the ship. Magnetic shoes
are a running theme of the series and are used by crews of small Pan Am
shuttles as well.

In the novel and television series *[The
Expanse](The_Expanse_(novel_series) "wikilink")*, characters frequently
use magnetized boots to keep themselves upright when not using thrust
acceleration to simulate gravity.

## See also

-   [Artificial gravity](Artificial_gravity "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   PBS' *History Detectives*, [Space
    Boots](https://www.pbs.org/opb/historydetectives/investigations/801_spaceboot.html),
    2010

[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Magnetic
devices](Category:Magnetic_devices "wikilink")

[1] <https://www.businessinsider.com/scott-kelly-weirdest-thing-year-in-space-2016-2>