![](Start-rite_Louisa_traditional_bar_shoes_or_"Mary-Jane"_shoes.jpg "fig:Start-rite_Louisa_traditional_bar_shoes_or_"Mary-Jane"_shoes.jpg")
(known as Sonnet in the United States).\]\]

**Mary Jane** (also known as bar shoes or "doll shoes") is an
[American](American_English "wikilink") term
([formerly](Genericized_trademark "wikilink") a [registered
trademark](Trademark#Registration "wikilink")) for a closed, low-cut
[shoe](shoe "wikilink") with one or more straps across the
[instep](instep "wikilink").

Classic Mary Janes for children are typically made of black
[leather](leather "wikilink") or [patent
leather](patent_leather "wikilink"), have one thin strap fastened with a
buckle or button, a broad and rounded [toebox](toebox "wikilink"), low
heels, and thin outsoles. Among girls, Mary Janes are traditionally worn
with pantyhose or socks or completely without them, and a dress or a
[skirt](skirt "wikilink") and [blouse](blouse "wikilink"). Among boys
(less common), Mary Janes are traditionally worn with socks (or without
them as well), short trousers and a shirt.

## History

![](Bundesarchiv_Bild_102-00068,_Oskar_von_Preußen_mit_Familie.jpg "fig:Bundesarchiv_Bild_102-00068,_Oskar_von_Preußen_mit_Familie.jpg")
in 1925: the three boys (aged 10, 8, and 3) are wearing Mary Janes.\]\]

Children's shoes secured by a strap over the instep and fastened with a
buckle or button appeared in the early 20th century. Originally worn by
both sexes, they began to be perceived as being mostly for girls during
the 1930s in North America and the 1940s in Europe.[1] They were also
popular with women in the 1920s.[2]

Today, Mary Janes for children, particularly the more classic styles,
are often considered semi-formal or formal shoes, appropriate for school
(many schools worldwide require that girls wear them with their
uniform), religious ceremonies, weddings, visits, and birthday parties
for example. More modern styles are also worn in casual settings,
however: playgrounds, shopping centers, sports (Mary Jane sneakers),
etc. Although less popular than in the past, Mary Janes remain a
timeless classic of children's fashion and, for many people, a symbol of
girlhood.

Moreover, Mary Janes are a preferred accessory of many traditional or
folk costumes, such as those of the [flamenco](flamenco "wikilink")
female dancer and of the typical woman in [Mao](Mao_Zedong "wikilink")'s
[China](China "wikilink") and the
[Kims](Kim_dynasty_(North_Korea) "wikilink")' [North
Korea](North_Korea "wikilink").

## Etymology

Mary Jane was a character created by [Richard Felton
Outcault](Richard_Felton_Outcault "wikilink"), "Father of the Sunday
Comic Strip", for his comic strip *[Buster
Brown](Buster_Brown "wikilink")*, which was first published in 1902. She
was the "sweetheart" of the title character Buster Brown and was drawn
from real life, as she was also Outcault's daughter of the same name. In
Outcault's own words—and his daughter's—she was the only character drawn
from life in the Buster Brown strip, although "Mrs. Brown" did resemble
Outcault's wife.

In 1904, Outcault traveled to the St. Louis World's Fair and sold
licenses to up to 200 companies to use the Buster Brown characters to
advertise their products. Among them was the [Brown Shoe
Company](Brown_Shoe_Company "wikilink"), which later hired actors to
tour the country, performing as the Buster Brown characters in theaters
and stores. This strategy helped the Brown Shoe Company become the most
prominently associated brand with the Buster Brown characters. The style
of shoe both Buster Brown and Mary Jane wore came to be known by her
name, Mary Jane.

## Adult styles

![](Chunky_mary_jane_shoes.jpg "Chunky_mary_jane_shoes.jpg")

While the classic Mary Jane still retains its wide popularity and
appeal, platform style Mary Janes have also evolved since the late
1990s, with 1-cm to 3-cm (½-in to 1-in) outsoles and 8-cm to 13-cm (3-in
to 5-in) "chunky" heels, often with exaggerated grommets or buckles. The
1920s-style Mary Janes were a famous part of flappers' ensembles, thus
reinforcing the childlike style the flappers had. These styles were
especially popular in the [United States](United_States "wikilink") in
the late 1990s and early 2000s, within [punk
rock](punk_rock "wikilink"), [psychobilly](psychobilly "wikilink") and
[goth](Goth_subculture "wikilink") subcultures. Many times the wearers
would accent the look with knee-high knit socks in dark-colored stripes
or patterns and/or some form of hosiery (stockings/pantyhose), and often
complete the look with a plaid, pleated
[schoolgirl](Student "wikilink")-style skirt.

[Velma Dinkley](Velma_Dinkley "wikilink"), member of the fictional
*[Scooby-Doo](Scooby-Doo "wikilink")* gang, is most notably attributed
to donning a red pair of Mary Jane shoes.

During the early 2000s, block-heeled Mary Jane shoes were popular in the
United Kingdom and were fastened by a rectangular chrome buckle and were
made under various brand names such as *No Doubt*, *Koi Couture* etc.

Mary Janes are a popular part of [kinderwhore](kinderwhore "wikilink")
and [Lolita fashion](Lolita_fashion "wikilink"). A
[pump](court_shoe "wikilink") with a strap across the instep may be
referred to as a "Mary Jane pump", although it does not have the low
heels or wide toe of the original Mary Jane (and a pump is generally
strapless by definition).

## See also

-

-   [T-bar sandal](T-bar_sandal "wikilink")—a very similar style

## References

<references />
[Category:1940s fashion](Category:1940s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1950s fashion](Category:1950s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1960s fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2000s fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:1902 in
comics](Category:1902_in_comics "wikilink") [Category:Fictional
costumes](Category:Fictional_costumes "wikilink")

[1]

[2]