![](Sindhi_shoes.jpg "Sindhi_shoes.jpg")

**Mojari** or **Khussa** or **Saleem Shahi's** is a style of
[handcrafted](Handicraft "wikilink") [footwear](footwear "wikilink")
produced in [South Asia](South_Asia "wikilink"). They are traditionally
made by [artisans](artisan "wikilink") mostly using tanned
[leather](leather "wikilink"). The uppers are made of one piece of
leather or [textile](textile "wikilink") embroidered and embellished
with brass nails, [cowry](cowry "wikilink") shells, mirrors,
[bells](Bell_(instrument) "wikilink") and [ceramic](ceramic "wikilink")
[beads](bead "wikilink"). Even the bonding from the upper to the
[sole](Sole_(shoe) "wikilink") is done by cotton thread that is not only
[eco-friendly](eco-friendly "wikilink") but also enmeshes the leather
[fibers](fiber "wikilink") with great strength. Some product range also
uses bright and ornate threads.[1]

As it evolved through the centuries and is being produced by individual
artisans, products vary in designs and colours. It encapsules [cultural
diversity](cultural_diversity "wikilink"), local ethos and ethnicity.[2]

## History

It is believed that one of the earliest examples of footwear worn on the
Indian subcontinent is a sandal of wood, datable to circa 200 BC. During
the 3rd and 4th Centuries in the Buddhist period, it was quite common to
wear strapped sandals, and Indian kings wore sandals ornamented with
precious jewels. Jain literature shows that leather was used for the
making of shoes, which protected the toes from getting injured. Hides of
cows, buffaloes, goats, sheep and other wild animals were used.[3]

The Mojari originated under the Mughal Empire, where it was decorated
with colours, gems, and other ornaments. They are said to have been
popularized under the Mughal King [Saleem Shah](Jahangir "wikilink") and
are often referred to as Saleem Shahis as a result.[4] They are also
commonly worn with [Shalwar Kameez](Shalwar_Kameez "wikilink"). Although
leather shoes have been worn for over 5,000 years by various
civilizations, they should not be confused with Mojaris, because Mojaris
are unique in their ornamental style, shape, and appearance.

## See also

-   [Jutti](Jutti "wikilink")
-   [Kolhapuri chappal](Kolhapuri_chappal "wikilink")
-   [Multani Khussa](Multani_Khussa "wikilink")
-   [Paduka](Paduka "wikilink")

## References

<references />

## External links

-   [BBC Culture - Includes image of golden mojari of a 19th-century
    Nizam of
    Hyderabad](http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20150618-ten-shoes-that-changed-the-world)

[Category:Folk footwear](Category:Folk_footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Indian footwear](Category:Indian_footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Pakistani footwear](Category:Pakistani_footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Mughal art](Category:Mughal_art "wikilink") [Category:Sindhi
culture](Category:Sindhi_culture "wikilink") [Category:Indian leather
industry](Category:Indian_leather_industry "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3] Feet and Footwear in Indian Culture, Jutta Jain-Neubauer, Bata Shoe
Museum Foundation, Toronto, Canada, in association with Mapin Publishing
Pvt. Ltd., p.171.

[4]