**Mountaineering boots** are a type of footwear used in [mountain
climbing](mountain_climbing "wikilink"). They are designed specifically
for moving over harsh terrain.

## Design

Not to be confused with [hiking boots](hiking_boots "wikilink"),
mountaineering boots are usually taller, stiffer, and insulated. The
boots can be made of [leather](leather "wikilink"),
[plastic](plastic "wikilink"), or modern synthetic materials like
[Kevlar](Kevlar "wikilink").

![](Mountainboots.jpg "fig:Mountainboots.jpg") The extra height and
stiffness of mountaineering boots helps support the climber in steep
terrain where flexible boots could cause unsure footing and possibly
result in a fall. This extra stiffness is traditionally achieved through
the use of a full steel [shank](Shank_(footwear) "wikilink"), though
some manufacturers have begun to use [carbon
fiber](carbon_fiber "wikilink") to create the necessary stiffness.

![](Mountaineering_Boot_Ad,_1911.jpg "fig:Mountaineering_Boot_Ad,_1911.jpg")
Mountaineering boots are typically designed to be used with
[crampons](crampons "wikilink"). To achieve compatibility with crampons,
welts are moulded into the toe and heel of the boot, providing a
platform for the crampon to attach to. The stiffness of the boot
enhances the precision of the crampon and allows a climber to pursue
steeper and more difficult terrain.

Another important aspect of mountaineering boots is warmth. To prevent
[frostbite](frostbite "wikilink") in extreme cold conditions, synthetic
insulation is incorporated into the boot. Lighter weight boots are
classified as single boots. These single boots are insulated as a single
unit with the insulation being permanently attached to the rest of the
boot. Double boots, another classification, typically consist of a
non-insulated leather or plastic outer shell with a removable insulated
liner. The purpose of a double boot is long-term protection from cold
weather. If the liner becomes wet, it can be removed from the shell and
dried inside a [sleeping bag](sleeping_bag "wikilink"). Since the
insulation cannot be removed from single boots, they are not ideally
suited for multi-day cold weather excursions.

## Other uses

Mountaineering boots are used for [ice
climbing](ice_climbing "wikilink"), mixed (rock & ice)
[climbing](climbing "wikilink"), and [crevasse](crevasse "wikilink")
traverse and [rescue](crevasse_rescue "wikilink"). They are not
completely stiff like ski boots as they need some degree of flexibility
for activities such as [hiking](hiking "wikilink") and
[snowshoeing](snowshoeing "wikilink").

The versatility of these boots also makes them popular for other
activities. With their durability and extreme-weather adaptability, they
are worn by snow-plough drivers, cable car operators, mountain rangers
(especially in the winter), rescue paramedics, ski lift operators and
[snowcat](snowcat "wikilink") drivers.

Mountaineering boots are generally considered to be too stiff for
[backpacking](backpacking_(wilderness) "wikilink") on established
trails.

In recent years, companies have been making mountaineering boots to be
NFPA compliant so they may be used in wildland firefighting.

## References

-   [Mountaineering
    Boots](https://www.webcitation.org/66RqzLfI9?url=http://www.spadout.com/w/mountaineering-boots/) -
    Spadout

[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Mountaineering
equipment](Category:Mountaineering_equipment "wikilink")