![](Yeezy_Samples.jpg "Yeezy_Samples.jpg")

The **Nike Air Yeezy** is an official sneaker collaboration project
between [Nike](Nike,_Inc. "wikilink") and [Kanye
West](Kanye_West "wikilink").

Notable as the shoe brand's first non-athlete full collaboration, the
project has released two editions: the "Air Yeezy" (2009) and the "Air
Yeezy II" (2012 and 2014).

## Design process

The Nike Air Yeezy was developed from 2007 to 2009 by rapper Kanye West,
Nike Creative Director Mark Smith and later Nathan Van Hook. Kanye has
spoken very highly of Smith as both a collaborator and designer, and
Smith has said the same of Kanye, stating that he is "a truly creative
talent" and a "natural designer."[1]

The design process for the Nike Air Yeezy was long and features dozens
of sample colorways and silhouettes. Inspiration behind the line notably
include the Air Tech Challenge II, Jordan III and IV. The early
prototype of the Air Yeezy had many features that greatly differ from
the release version of the shoe. For instance, the midsole and outsole
featured what the shoe’s creators referred to as "Death Star" tooling,
named for the large spherical shape on the back half of the midsole. The
outsole also featured the "Y-print" that was used on the
[toebox](toebox "wikilink") of the three release versions. Also, on the
very early prototypes, the shoe used LED lights implanted in the
outsole, but after issues with low battery life and cost evaluation,
production staff at Nike came to the conclusion that
[phosphorescent](Phosphorescence "wikilink") rubber would be used in
place of the [LED lights](Light-emitting_diode "wikilink").[2]

While several color and wear test samples of the Nike Air Yeezy were
made, some are more widely known and discussed than others. West wore an
all black suede pair during his 2008 Grammy Awards performance of
"Stronger" and "Hey Mama." Up until after his performance, the public
was unaware that a collaboration between Nike and Kanye West was in the
works . This sample was later sold via an online charity auction to
benefit the patients of the Doernbecher Children’s Hospital alongside an
unreleased prototype of the Nike Air Yeezy featuring the tooling used on
the popular Air Jordan VI.[3] Mark Smith stated that Kanye wanted to use
Jordan tooling on the Air Yeezy, but that Nike would not allow it, and
therefore, before the date of the auction, Kanye was unaware that the
"Jordan VI" Nike Air Yeezy sample existed.[4] The other sample that was
met with much discussion among fans of the shoe was the "Fire Red" Nike
Air Yeezy, which was named for the bright red color on the midsole. This
colorway was first worn by Kanye during his "Glow in the Dark" Tour and
has been worn by the rapper several times since. According to industry
rumors, this colorway was strongly considered for release alongside the
other 3 release colorways, but was scrapped at the last minute.[5]

## Release

After the long sampling process, three colorways of the Nike Air Yeezy
were chosen for public release; a "Zen Grey" colorway that released on
April 4, 2009 and was the colorway that was created after almost equal
input from Smith and West, a "Black/Pink" colorway (sometimes referred
to as the "Blink" colorway) which was more the brainchild of Mark Smith
and released on May 4th, 2009, and finally a "Net" colorway that
reflected more of Kanye West’s design tastes and released on June 1,
2009.[6] Each colorway had a suggested retail price of $215 and sold out
almost immediately.[7][8]

## Nike Air Yeezy 2

### Design process

Anticipation around the release of the Nike Air Yeezy 2 started after a
Complex Magazine interview with Mark Smith and Kanye West about
designing the Nike Air Yeezy, wherein Kanye stated that there were
several designs left over from the Air Yeezy design process that could
eventually become the Nike Air Yeezy 2.[9] Despite this statement, none
of these designs were used for the Air Yeezy 2, and instead, Nathan
VanHook sat down with Kanye to design the Yeezy 2.[10] The shoe features
much more of an animalistic design inspiration than the original Air
Yeezy, sporting a ridged, reptile inspired heel counter and a snake skin
inspired design on the quarters. The shoe, like the original Air Yeezy,
borrows tooling from other Nike models. The Air Yeezy 2 borrows its sole
unit from the popular Nike Air Tech Challenge II tennis model. The shoe
also features several references to Egyptian culture, featuring
depictions of the god Horus on the tongue and insole, and using Egyptian
hieroglyphics that spell out "YZY" under the strap.[11]

There were also several design decisions during the making of the Nike
Air Yeezy 2 that were a direct response to some of Kanye’s issues with
the initial Nike Air Yeezy. Firstly, unnecessary padding along the upper
was eliminated, and the shoe was made shorter for greater mobility.
Also, the shoe was purposely slimmed down, to create a thinner look on
feet and better fit Kanye West’s foot.[12]

As with the original Nike Air Yeezy, several sample colorways were
created, the most famous of which was the "Kobe" or "Cheetah" Nike Air
Yeezy 2 sample which was based on a popular Christmas colorway of the
Nike Kobe VII. Aside from the rumored three pairs in existence and the
pictures of the aforementioned sample that spread through various
sneaker media sources, very little is known about the sample.[13]

### Release

Following a series of high-profile teases of the shoe (including rapper
[Jay Z](Jay_Z "wikilink") exclaiming "Shoutout to my Yeezys, Yeezy 2s"
during a March 2012 [SXSW](SXSW "wikilink") performance), Nike announced
the Air Yeezy II sneaker on May 29, 2012.[14][15] Rapper
[Macklemore](Macklemore "wikilink") was also seen wearing the Nike Air
Yeezy 2's during his performance in Times Square, New York on New Year's
Eve. Macklemore was also seen throwing the rare sneaker into the
crowd.[16]

Amid wide anticipation, the shoe was released with 5000 of each color
way on June 9, 2012. While sold for a retail price of $245, the shoe
gained notoriety for its wildly inflated resale value upwards of $4,000.
The Air Yeezy II featured two premier color ways, Solar Red, Pure
Platinum, and a third color way of the Air Yeezy II shoes, dubbed the
"Red Octobers", which underwent a surprise release on February 9, 2014.
The "Red Octobers" released exclusively on Nike's website, and sold out
within seconds.[17][18][19][20][21][22][23]

## References

[Category:Hip hop fashion](Category:Hip_hop_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Kanye West](Category:Kanye_West "wikilink") [Air Yeezy,
Nike](Category:Nike_brands "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink")

[1] "Nike Air Yeezy – Sneakers by Kanye West." Sneaker News. 18 Apr
2008: n. page. Web. 5 Mar. 2014.
\<<http://sneakernews.com/2008/04/18/nike-x-kanye-west-air-yeezys/>\>.

[2] Hundiak, Ian. "Every Unreleased Yeezy and the True Stories Behind
Them." Sneaker News. 6 Mar 2014: n. page. Web. 6 Mar. 2014.
\<<http://sneakernews.com/2014/03/06/unreleased-yeezys-and-the-true-stories-behind-them/2/>\>.

[3] Hundiak, Ian. "Every Unreleased Yeezy and the True Stories Behind
Them." Sneaker News. 6 Mar 2014: n. page. Web. 6 Mar. 2014.
\<<http://sneakernews.com/2014/03/06/unreleased-yeezys-and-the-true-stories-behind-them/3/>\>.

[4] Hundiak, Ian. "Every Unreleased Yeezy and the True Stories Behind
Them." Sneaker News. 6 Mar 2014: n. page. Web. 6 Mar. 2014.
\<<http://sneakernews.com/2014/03/06/unreleased-yeezys-and-the-true-stories-behind-them/4/>\>.

[5] Hundiak, Ian. "Every Unreleased Yeezy and the True Stories Behind
Them." Sneaker News. 6 Mar 2014: n. page. Web. 6 Mar. 2014.
\<<http://sneakernews.com/2014/03/06/unreleased-yeezys-and-the-true-stories-behind-them/15/>\>.

[6] "Nike Air Yeezy – Sneakers by Kanye West." Sneaker News. 18 Apr
2008: n. page. Web. 5 Mar. 2014.
\<<http://sneakernews.com/2008/04/18/nike-x-kanye-west-air-yeezys/>\>.

[7]

[8]

[9] "Air Yeezy Interview Outtakes: Kanye & Nike's Mark Smith." Complex
Magazine. 03 Apr 2009: n. page. Web. 5 Mar. 2014.
\<<http://www.complex.com/sneakers/2009/04/air-yeezy-interview-outtakes-kanye-nikes-mark-smith>\>.

[10] Lin, Albert. "NIKE AIR YEEZY II DESIGNER NATHAN VANHOOK TALKS
METHODS OF MAKING." Nice Kicks. 2012: n. page. Web. 23 Mar. 2014.
\<<http://www.nicekicks.com/2012/06/22/nike-air-yeezy-ii-designer-nathan-vanhook-talks-methods-making/>\>.

[11] "THE NIKE AIR YEEZY III." Nike Inc.. 30 May 2012: n. page.134

`Web. 5 Mar. 2014. <`[`http://nikeinc.com/news/the-nike-air-yeezy-ii`](http://nikeinc.com/news/the-nike-air-yeezy-ii)`>.`

[12] "THE NIKE AIR YEEZY II." Nike Inc.. 30 May 2012: n. page. Web. 5
Mar. 2014. \<<http://nikeinc.com/news/the-nike-air-yeezy-ii>\>.

[13] Hundiak, Ian. "Every Unreleased Yeezy and the True Stories Behind
Them." Sneaker News. 6 Mar 2014: n. page. Web. 6 Mar. 2014.
\<<http://sneakernews.com/2014/03/06/unreleased-yeezys-and-the-true-stories-behind-them/19/>\>.

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]