The ***Nike Hypervenom*** is a [football boot](football_boot "wikilink")
that is manufactured by [Nike](Nike,_Inc. "wikilink"). This type of boot
is said to be for traction, power, and agility, designed for deceptive
players. Therefore, it is endorsed/worn by players, notably
[forwards](Forward_(association_football) "wikilink"), such as [Robert
Lewandowski](Robert_Lewandowski "wikilink"), [Harry
Kane](Harry_Kane "wikilink"), [Edinson
Cavani](Edinson_Cavani "wikilink"), [Gonzalo
Higuaín](Gonzalo_Higuaín "wikilink"), [Mauro
Icardi](Mauro_Icardi "wikilink") and
[Thiago](Thiago_Alcântara "wikilink").[1][2]

In May 2013, the *Nike Hypervenom Phantom* was launched. It was launched
and designed for Brazilian forward [Neymar](Neymar "wikilink").[3] The
boot is currently in its third version. There is one high-end model for
the first version, the *Hypervenom Phantom*; whereas, there are two
high-end models for the second version—the *Nike Hypervenom Phantom II*,
which is a mid-cut variant and the *Nike Hypervenom Phinish*, the
low-cut variant. However, Nike chose to discontinue the Nike Hypervenom
Phinish from the third silo onwards due to confusion that the mid-cut
version was better than the low-cut. The mid-cut version will be called
"Hypervenom Phantom DF".[4]

The boot is available in Soft Ground (SG), Firm Ground (FG) or
Artificial Ground (AG) versions in which all feature a glass nylon
soleplate. There are also Turf (TF) and Indoor (IC) versions, in which
the high-end model of these variants is the *Nike HypervenomX Proximo*.
The SG soleplate features 6 removable aluminium studs, in which
different studs with different lengths can be used, and 6 fixed bladed
studs. The FG version has 12 bladed and conical studs. The AG model
contains many circular and hollow studs, meant to have more pressure
distribution and trapping air to reduce impact and prevent injuries. The
silo was replaced by the "Phantom Venom" in January 2019.

## Background

The *Nike Hypervenom Phantom* introduced several new features from other
football boots at the time. It was made to replace the previous line,
*[Nike Total 90](Nike_Total_90 "wikilink") (T90)*, a line from Nike that
has been around since 2000. This decision was met with mixed feelings,
in which some say it is a good decision to replace the older line, and
the others saying it was not a beneficial idea, as there were not many
'power' boots on the market.[5] The *Hypervenom* was launched in May
2013, with the [Barcelona](FC_Barcelona "wikilink") player, at the time,
[Neymar](Neymar "wikilink"), the main poster boy for this new line. The
launch colourway was black/bright citrus. All boots were made in Soft
Ground (SG), Firm Ground (FG) varieties, with the SG version using
removable studs. The upper of the first boot has a newly developed
material of *NikeSkin.*[6]

## Hypervenom Phantom

The *Hypervenom Phantom* was released in May 2013. The boot was first
known through a Nike commercial "Nike Hypervenom - Deadly Breed". Later
on, more commercials will be made starring [Neymar](Neymar "wikilink")
in which t*he video is counting down to the released date of the
Hypervenoms. The boot are advertised to be for "fit, touch and
traction". The boots are originally released in the black/bright* citrus
colourway.

The *Hypervenom Phantom* features a *NikeSkin* upper, combining mesh
webbing and thin layers of polyurethane to create a material that is
soft and flexible, *All-Conditions Control (ACC)* for the same control
for any condition, whether wet or dry. The upper of the *Hypervenoms* is
honeycomed-like in design. It also feature a lightweight, perforated
anatomical sockliner for low-profile cushioning and has a responsive
glass nylon chassis with agility traction stud pattern for agility,
comfort and durability. Those who use these boots have said that they
are able to move freely with ease and felt comfortable in those boots.
However, some argue that it lacks proper tightness that they encounter
issues such as roll-over or heel slippage. There are also some who said
that the boots are not durable and lasted quite a short time under
frequent use.[7]

During the knockout stages of the [2014 FIFA World
Cup](2014_FIFA_World_Cup "wikilink"), following a 4–1 win over
[Cameroon](Cameroon_national_football_team "wikilink") in which Neymar
scored the tournament’s 100th goal, Nike commemorated this with a
special edition pair of *Gold/Volt/Black* *Hypervenom* boots. This was
also made because Neymar spray painted his football boots gold when he
was 12 years old.[8]

In early 2015, the *Liquid Diamond Hypervenom* was released. It was made
to help Neymar "stand out" in a match, to describe Neymar's energetic
style of playing and the feelings that Neymar had to his sister was
"rare, like diamonds" as stated in a Nike commercial.[9]

In mid-2015, the *Hypervenom Phantom Transform SE* was released. It
features a special upper that changes from black to orange when heat is
applied to it. This was the last edition of the *Hypervenom Phantom I*.

## Hypervenom Phantom II/Hypervenom Phinish

Two years after the *Hypervenom Phantom I* was released, the new
*Hypervenom Phantom II* and *Hypervenom Phinish* was released. This
time, there were significant changes to the upper in terms of design and
fit. The launch colourway is *Wolf Grey/Total Orange/Black.*

### Hypervenom Phantom II

The *Hypervenom Phantom II* is a mid-cut boot due to the *Nike Dynamic
Fit Collar* which is made out of *Flyknit* said to provide *ankle
support*. As before, it has an *ACC upper*. It also features a different
*NikeSkin* upper from the previous version. One of the difference was
the use of Nike's *Flywire* technology to provide a lock-in and
tightened feel for a cleaner strike.

### Change of upper

Due to the complaints about the new upper being too stiff, Nike opted to
change the upper to the original ones on the Nike Hypervenom 1,
effective 29 May 2016.

## Hypervenom III

In February 2017, Nike introduced the next generation of Hypervenom
shoes with the Nike Hypervenom III. Nike did away with the Phinish and
renamed that shoe 'Nike Hypervenom Phantom'. The collared shoe that had
previously been known as the Nike Hypervenom Phantom is now the 'Nike
Hypervenom Phantom DF' with the DF standing for Dynamic Fit referring to
the collar. Nike have made noticeable aesthetic and construction
alterations that make the Phantom III a different experience from the
Phantom II.[10]

## Hypervenom X

As the demand for urban football (street/cage football) is high, Nike
created urban football boots using the same materials and/or design of
their pitch football boots. The main difference in this line of
Hypervenom is the use of gum rubber for the sole of the indoor and turf
design.

![](HypervenomX_Proximo.png "HypervenomX_Proximo.png")

### HypervenomX Proximo

The HypervenomX Proximo has exactly the same upper as the Hypervenom
Phantom III. The only difference is use of a non-marking rubber sole for
traction on indoor or turf courts and not including the PORON foam
inserts

### HypervenomX Finale

The HypervenomX Finale is the high-end low-cut model of the HypervenomX
line. However, the upper is different compared to the upper used on the
Hypervenom Phantom model. The upper is rather similar to the upper on
the first version of the Hypervenom line, the Hypervenom Phantom 1. It
also lacks ACC(All-Conditions Control).
![](HypervenomX_Finale_Turf.jpg "fig:HypervenomX_Finale_Turf.jpg")

## See also

-   [Nike Tiempo](Nike_Tiempo "wikilink"), Nike's "touch" boot
-   [Nike Mercurial](Nike_Mercurial "wikilink"), Nike's "speed" boot
-   [Nike Magista](Nike_Magista "wikilink"), Nike's "control" boot

## References

[Category:Sportswear brands](Category:Sportswear_brands "wikilink")
[Category:Nike brands](Category:Nike_brands "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]