**Nike Flywire** is a thread, composed of [Vectran](Vectran "wikilink")
or [nylon](nylon "wikilink"), and developed by
[Nike](Nike,_Inc. "wikilink"), used in the
[upper](Shoe#Vamp.2C_or_upper "wikilink") of a [shoe](shoe "wikilink").
The goal of Flywire is to minimize weight and maximize support. Shoes
containing Flywire became available for consumer purchase in 2008.
![](Lunaracer-Flywire.png "fig:Lunaracer-Flywire.png")

## Development

Flywire was created by Jay Meschter, Director of Innovation at Nike. He
began by taking a [last](last "wikilink") (an object shaped like a foot
used to design shoes) and marking the key points of where a shoe needs
to support the foot. When Meschter saw an [embroidery
machine](Machine_embroidery#Embroidery_machines "wikilink"), he
determined the machine could be used to make long stitches. Long
stitches allow lightweight fibers to support the foot in key points,
instead of using layers of material that support the whole foot. This
idea was pioneered by [Adolph Dassler](Adolph_Dassler "wikilink") in
1949, when he added 3 reinforcing stripes to his canvas
[Adidas](Adidas "wikilink") running shoe.[1]

## Design

The goal of the design is to help and support the foot using the
lightest and strongest material possible, [Vectran](Vectran "wikilink").
The Flywire design (threads placed in key parts of the upper) prevents
the foot from slipping when running. Flywire is also a
[minimalist](minimalism "wikilink") idea (the idea that items should
only contain necessities), since the upper only contains the fundamental
features. This allows the maximum amount of energy to be moved forward
each stride.[2]

### Vectran

Nike adapts Vectran fibers, which are produced by
[Kuraray](Kuraray "wikilink"), into embroidery threads, before use in
the shoe. Vectran fibers are thinner than human hair, and relatively
inexpensive. Vectran is lightweight, flexible, and high in [tensile
strength](tensile_strength "wikilink"), the stress at which material
deforms (five times stronger than steel[3]), which makes it an ideal
component for synthetic fibers. Vectran has also been used by
[NASA](NASA "wikilink") and in bicycle tires, among other things.[4] .

### Support

Nike designed Flywire with inspiration from a [suspension
bridge](suspension_bridge "wikilink"), where many
[cables](Wire_rope "wikilink") provide support. This allows support to
be placed where necessary, especially in the forefoot
([metatarsus](metatarsus "wikilink") and toes) and heel. The cables are
designed to wrap around the foot like [tendons](tendon "wikilink").
Since the support does not come from layers of material, the shoe is
also more flexible. The only layers of material on the shoe are in place
to prevent dirt and rocks from reaching the foot.[5]

### Weight

Due to the Vectran fibers, shoes containing Nike Flywire weigh as little
as 93 [grams](gram "wikilink"), "approximately the weight of a
[Snickers](Snickers "wikilink") bar with a bite missing."[6] There is
little excess weight because the upper is very thin, and the Vectran
fibers are only added where support is needed. Shoe weight can be
reduced up to 50% through the use of Flywire.[7] [Track
spikes](Track_spikes "wikilink") (running shoes with spikes added for
traction) containing Flywire are now lighter than [Michael
Johnson's](Michael_Johnson_(athlete) "wikilink") famous Golden Shoes of
the [1996 Summer Olympics](1996_Summer_Olympics "wikilink") in Atlanta,
Georgia. These spikes are so light that athletes claim they are like "a
second skin" or "spikes coming out of their feet."[8] This is a goal
that [Bill Bowerman](Bill_Bowerman "wikilink") tried to achieve as
co-founder of Nike and a spike designer.[9]

## Shoes

![](Nike_air_max_hyperfly_supreme_paul_pierce.jpg "fig:Nike_air_max_hyperfly_supreme_paul_pierce.jpg")
Many Nike shoes contain Flywire. These shoes are designed for a variety
of activities and sports, including [running](running "wikilink"),
[athletics](Track_and_field_athletics "wikilink"),
[basketball](basketball "wikilink"), [badminton](badminton "wikilink"),
[football](Association_football "wikilink"), [American
Football](American_Football "wikilink"), [baseball](baseball "wikilink")
and [tennis](tennis "wikilink"). The
[athletics](Track_and_field_athletics "wikilink") shoes were debuted at
the [2007 World
Championships](2007_World_Championships_in_Athletics "wikilink") at
[Osaka](Osaka "wikilink"), while the rest made their first appearance at
the [2008 Summer Olympics](2008_Summer_Olympics "wikilink"), in Beijing,
China, though all are now available for consumer purchase.[10]

## References

<references />
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Nike,
Inc.](Category:Nike,_Inc. "wikilink")

[1] <https://runningtortoiseandhare.wordpress.com/running-shoes/history-of-running-shoes/>

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]