## History

![](Osiris_NYC_83_shoes.jpg "fig:Osiris_NYC_83_shoes.jpg") The Osiris
skateboard video "The Storm" (1999) won the *Transworld* magazine's
readers poll's for best video.
![](Osiris_D3_2001.JPG "fig:Osiris_D3_2001.JPG")

## Teams

As of October 2014, the company sponsors team members in skateboarding,
BMX, surf, and echelon.

### Osiris D3

Brian Reid Co. founder of the OSIRIS designed the D3 and D3 2001 with
his business partner TONY MAGNUSSON. Brian and Dave Mayhew went shopping
after Dave missed a meeting and wanted to endorse a shoe called the
GURU. They bought a few shoes some athletic and one hiking boot. This is
where the famous large looks were inspired by. Former professional
skateboarder Dave Mayhew endorsed the "D3" model, a popular skate
shoe.[1] The second version of the shoe, the "D3 2001", became very
popular and Osiris then released a smaller, lighter, less bulkier
version called the "D3 NTX". The "D3 4.0" and a "D3 Snowboarding" boot
followed, and both were based on the design of the D3 2001 model.

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Shoe companies of the United
States](Category:Shoe_companies_of_the_United_States "wikilink")
[Category:Skateboarding
companies](Category:Skateboarding_companies "wikilink") [Category:Shoe
brands](Category:Shoe_brands "wikilink") [Category:Companies based in
San Diego County,
California](Category:Companies_based_in_San_Diego_County,_California "wikilink")
[Category:Companies established in
1996](Category:Companies_established_in_1996 "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Skateboard shoe
companies](Category:Skateboard_shoe_companies "wikilink")

[1] [15 Things You Didn't Know About Skate
Shoes](http://www.skateboardermag.com/skateboarder-news-features/magazine/15thngshoes/),
Salo, Adam, Skateboarder Magazine. Retrieved on 2006-12-5