![](Paduka.jpg "Paduka.jpg")

**Paduka** is India's oldest, most quintessential footwear. It is little
more than a sole with a post and knob, which is engaged between the big
and second toe.[1] It has been historically worn in [South
Asia](South_Asia "wikilink") and [Southeast
Asia](Southeast_Asia "wikilink").

It exists in a variety of forms and materials throughout India. They
might be made in the shape of actual feet, or of fish, for example, and
are made of wood, ivory and even silver. They are sometimes elaborately
decorated. The more elaborate shoes could be part of a bride's
trousseau, but could also be given as religious offerings or be
themselves the object of veneration.[2]

Although simple wooden padukas could be worn by common people, padukas
of fine teak, ebony and sandalwood, inlaid with ivory or wire, were a
mark of the wearer's high status.[3]

Today paduka as footwear is generally worn by mendicants and saints of
[Hinduism](Hinduism "wikilink"), [Buddhism](Buddhism "wikilink") and
[Jainism](Jainism "wikilink"). Its significance in
[Hinduism](Hinduism "wikilink") is linked to the epic
[Ramayana](Ramayana "wikilink"). "Paduka" can also refer to the
footprints of deities and saints that are venerated.[4][5][6][7]

Paduka also means the footprints of divine figures such as
[Vishnu](Vishnu "wikilink") and [Shiva](Shiva "wikilink") and other
religious icons that are worshipped in this symbolic form in houses and
also in temples built for this purpose. One such temple is the
[Vishnupad Mandir](Vishnupad_Mandir "wikilink") in [Gaya,
India](Gaya,_India "wikilink"). Similarly, [Buddha
footprints](Buddha_footprint "wikilink") are worshipped under the [Bodhi
Tree](Bodhi_Tree "wikilink") in [Bodh Gaya](Bodh_Gaya "wikilink").[8][9]

It is also the royal symbol in [Malaysia](Malaysia "wikilink"); "Seri
Paduka" denotes "His Majesty", which is a title bestowed as an honour of
recognition to the dignitaries of Malaysian court for their outstanding
contribution to the betterment of their
State.[10]![](Orissa_State_Museum,_Bhubaneswar_(10)_-_Oct_2010.jpg "fig:Orissa_State_Museum,_Bhubaneswar_(10)_-_Oct_2010.jpg")

## Etymology

![](BM-Paduka.JPG "fig:BM-Paduka.JPG") (1660–1753). Now in the
collection of the [British Museum](British_Museum "wikilink")\]\] The
[Sanskrit](Sanskrit "wikilink") word *pāduka* is derivative of *pāda*
"foot". This terminology was coined to define India's ancient archetypal
footwear.[11]

## Legend

The word *pada* ('foot') is cited in the ancient Hindu scripture -
[Rigveda](Rigveda "wikilink"), as representing the universe namely the
[Prithvi](Prithvi "wikilink") (earth), [Vayu](Vayu "wikilink") (air),
[Akash](Akash "wikilink") (sky) and the element of the realm beyond the
sky.[12]

In the Hindu epic [Ramayana](Ramayana "wikilink"), King
[Dasaratha](Dasaratha "wikilink") who had a curse on him, sent his son
[Rama](Rama "wikilink") (an [incarnation](incarnation "wikilink") of god
[Vishnu](Vishnu "wikilink")) for 14 years of exile, at the behest of his
wife [Kaikeyi](Kaikeyi "wikilink") (step mother of Rama) as she wanted
her son [Bharata](Bharata_(Ramayana) "wikilink") to be crowned as the
king. Rama, his consort [Sita](Sita "wikilink") and brother
[Laksmana](Laksmana "wikilink") went into a forest to spend their period
of exile. But Bharata did not want to have the kingdom. He, therefore,
met Rama who was living in the forest and beseeched him to return to
[Ayodhya](Ayodhya "wikilink"). When Rama told Bharata that he will
return only after completing his fourteen years in the forest, Bharata
requested for Rama's paduka to serve as his proxy, to be crowned in
Ayodhya Raj Singhasan (King's throne) of [Kosala](Kosala "wikilink")
country and to serve as an object of veneration for Rama's followers.
Bharata carried Rama's golden sandals (padukas) with great reverence by
placing them on his head as a mark of his obedience to his elder
brother. Bharata ruled Kosala as Rama's proxy in the name of "Ram's
Padukas".[13][14]

## Sandal structure

![](Pandit_woman_1922_vintage_by_Vishwanath.jpg "fig:Pandit_woman_1922_vintage_by_Vishwanath.jpg")
The footwear is typically a sandal, which has generally a wooden sole
with a post and a stub to provide grip to the foot between the big and
second toes. It is also known as *karrow*, *kharawan* and *karom* and
used in the [Indian subcontinent](Indian_subcontinent "wikilink") mostly
by mendicants, saints and common man for special occasions.[15] Made in
the shape of the foot prints, with two narrow and curved stilts, the
design is specific to ensure that the principle of
[non-violence](ahimsa "wikilink") - practised by the saintly followers
of Hindu and Jain religions - is not violated by accidental trampling on
insects and vegetation. The often heard prayer on the lips of a Brahmin
wearing such a paduka is:"Forgive me Mother Earth the sin of injury, the
violence I do, by placing my feet upon you this morning."[16]

Padukas made of [ivory](ivory "wikilink") were in popular use among
royalty and saints. These are, however, made from ivory of dead
elephants or extracted from live domesticated elephants. Elephants are
not killed for the purpose of making such sandals because Hindu
religious ethos does not permit such cruel acts.[17] Padukas are also
worn by common people. But people of high status in the society wear
padukas made out of fine [teak](teak "wikilink"),
[ebony](ebony "wikilink") and [sandalwood](sandalwood "wikilink") and
inlaid with ivory or wire. It is also made in the shape of a fish, as a
symbol of fertility.[18]

Other forms of padukas worn on special occasions are: Silver Paduka
incised with [silver](silver "wikilink") or of wood covered with silver
plates and sometimes adorned with bells to sound upon walking;
[Bronze](Bronze "wikilink") Padukas and [Brass](Brass "wikilink")
Padukas with significance for ritual and ceremonial use.[19]

A unique pair of wooden padukas has toe knobs inlaid with ivory lotus
flowers and is minutely painted. At each step, a trigger mechanism in
the sole signals the lotus to open from bud to blossom. It is also made
in the shape of an [hourglass](hourglass "wikilink") or with carved
toes.[20]

An eighteenth-century footwear used as ritual wear made of "wood with
bed of sharp iron spikes" has been found. It is inferred that it was
meant to be used to inflict pain to the wearer to demonstrate his
conviction in religious forbearance of pain.[21]

## Veneration

![](Alandi_Palki_08.jpg "fig:Alandi_Palki_08.jpg") is carried in
palanquin in a silver bullock cart in procession from
[Alandi](Alandi "wikilink") to [Pandharpur](Pandharpur "wikilink")\]\]
Paduka is also gifted as part of a bride's dowry. They are worshipped
and also given as votive offerings by the faithful believers.[22]

In a festival associated with the Hindu god
[Vithoba](Vithoba "wikilink"), pilgrims travel to his
[Pandharpur](Pandharpur "wikilink") temple from
[Alandi](Alandi "wikilink") and [Dehu](Dehu "wikilink") towns that are
closely associated with poet-saints
[Dnyaneshwar](Dnyaneshwar "wikilink") and [Tukaram](Tukaram "wikilink")
respectively, carrying the Padukas of the saints in a silver
[palkhi](palkhi "wikilink") (palanquin).

The popular religious belief is that of the contact (*sparsh*) with the
[Salabhanjika](Salabhanjika "wikilink")
[yakshini](yakshini "wikilink")'s foot. It is said that when the
Yakshini encircles a dormant tree with her leg around it, it starts to
blossom and bear fruit. [Shalabhanjika](Shalabhanjika "wikilink") yakshi
is also an embellishment in the form of an architectural bracket in many
Hindu temples.[23]

Another notable feature of veneration is of goddess
[Lakshmi](Lakshmi "wikilink"), the goddess of prosperity. On
[Deepavali](Deepavali "wikilink") festival day, Lakshmi is devotionally
ushered into the house by symbolic representation with a series of her
foot prints (*paduka*) drawn in paint or [kolam](kolam "wikilink") and
lighted all along with oil lamps, from the main door of the house into
the private sanctum in the house. This is done with the prayerful wish
that good fortune shall be bestowed by her on the householders.[24]

Below the [Bodhi tree](Bodhi_tree "wikilink") at [Bodh
Gaya](Bodh_Gaya "wikilink") where Buddha got enlightenment, there is a
vacant throne that is adorned with the foot prints on a foot rest of the
Buddha. This place is deeply venerated.[25]

Vishnupad temple

![](Paduka_footwear_of_Saints.jpg "fig:Paduka_footwear_of_Saints.jpg")
[Vishnupada Mandir](Vishnupada_Mandir "wikilink") is said to enshrine
the footprints of god Vishnu.[26] This footprint denotes the act of
Vishnu subduing [Gayasur](Gayasur "wikilink") by placing his foot on
[Gayasur](Gayasur "wikilink")'s chest. Inside the temple, the long
*footprint* of Vishnu is imprinted in solid rock and surrounded by a
silver-plated octagonal open enclosure.[27] The temple is in height and
has 8 rows of elegantly carved pillars that support the
[pavilion](pavilion "wikilink").[28] Within the temple precincts, the
banyan tree called the '[Akshayabat](Akshayabat "wikilink")' is located
where the final rituals for the dead takes place.

Paduka Sahasram

Paduka Sahasram, literal meaning "1000 verses on the padukas of the
Lord", is devotional poetry extolling the virtues of worshipping the
Paduka (feet) of god Vishnu whose deity is enshrined in [Sri
Ranganathaswamy
Temple](Sri_Ranganathaswamy_Temple,_Srirangam "wikilink") in
[Srirangam](Srirangam "wikilink") in [Tamil
Nadu](Tamil_Nadu "wikilink"). It is considered a sacred script of the
[Sri Sampradaya](Sri_Sampradaya "wikilink") or [Sri
Vaishnavism](Sri_Vaishnavism "wikilink"), who are known by the surname
[Iyengar](Iyengar "wikilink"), also spelt
[Ayyangar](Ayyangar "wikilink") in [South
India](South_India "wikilink"). The Sahasram was composed in 1008 verses
in 32 chapters by Swami [Vedantha Desika](Vedantha_Desika "wikilink"), a
follower of the [Vishishtadvaita](Vishishtadvaita "wikilink") philosophy
propounded by saint [Ramanujacharya](Ramanujacharya "wikilink"). It is
also said that Desika composed this magnamopus, as a challenge to his
rival group of Tengalai Iyengars (Iyengars belonging to the southern
school of the Srivaishnava philosophy), in one *yamam* of a night
meaning one quarter of a night, which was acclaimed as a master piece of
religious poetry and he was awarded the title of Mahakavi. The eulogy of
the Lord's Paduka by Desika is spun around Rama's sandals (Paduka),
which ruled the kingdom of Ayodhya for 14 years. He propounds that it
was due to the special relationship that people of Ayodhya had with
Rama's Paduka that they attained liberation, meaning salvation in
life.[29][30] ![](Paduka_Poojan.jpg "fig:Paduka_Poojan.jpg")

Guru Paduka Sthothram

[Adi Shankaracharya](Adi_Shankaracharya "wikilink") has also written
nine devotional verses under the title "Guru Paduka Sthothram" as
salutations to his guru, in this case meaning the Lord. The English
language translation of the first verse means:[31]

> <poem> Salutations and Salutations to the sandals of my Guru, Which is
> a boat, which helps me, cross the endless ocean of life, Which endows
> me, with the sense of devotion to my Guru, And by worship of which, I
> attain the dominion of renunciation. </poem>

Paduka Poojan (Worship of Paduka)

As per Ramayana (an ancient Indian epic), Bharatha (brother of Lord
Rama, Indian Hindu Deity) requested for the pious paduka of Lord Rama so
that they can be placed on the throne on behalf of the Lord till he
returned from the 14 years of long exile. Bharatha worshipped his
padukas in his absence. This was the first universal Paduka Poojan
(worship) of Lord Rama performed by Bharatha and hence called the first
universal Satchidananda Utsav (Celebration of Truth, Consciousness and
Bliss)

“Satchidananda Utsav” is organised by Sadguru Shree Aniruddha Upasana
Trust (Mumbai, India) and celebrated every year on the second Saturday
of the month of “Margashirsha”(ninth month of Hindu calendar). It is
usually performed for two to five consecutive days. The holy paduka's
worshipped during the Satchidananda Utsav are prepared from the paper
pulp of Ram Naam books issued by [Aniruddha's Universal Bank of Ram
Naam](Ram_Nam "wikilink") and written by thousands of devotees across
the world.[32][33][34][35]

## Gallery

<File:Indian> paduka in fish shape, South Bengal - Bata Shoe Museum -
DSC00168.JPG\|Paduka at exhibit in the Bata Shoe Museum <File:Indian>
paduka that sprays lotus water from its toe-knobs, undated - Bata Shoe
Museum - DSC00171.JPG\|Exhibit in the Bata Shoe Museum <File:Indian>
paduka, Jaipur, 18th century AD - Bata Shoe Museum -
DSC00046.JPG\|Silver Paduka, Bata Shoe Museum <File:Paduka> -
India.jpg\|Silver Paduka, Bata Shoe Museum <File:Codice> Casanatense
Jews of Malabar.jpg\|Cochin Jews in Kerala wearing Paduka, Portuguese
painting 16th century.

## References

## External links

-   [All about shoes:
    Padukas](http://www.allaboutshoes.ca/en/paduka/the_paduka/index.php)

[Category:Clogs (shoes)](Category:Clogs_(shoes) "wikilink")
[Category:Indian footwear](Category:Indian_footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Hindu symbols](Category:Hindu_symbols "wikilink")

[1] [All About Shoes - The Bata Shoe
Museum](http://www.allaboutshoes.ca/en/paduka/the_paduka/index.php)

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32] <https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/shree-satchidanand-utsav-given-sadguru-aniruddha-bapu-mihir-nagarkar>

[33] <http://aniruddhafoundation.com/sacchidanand-utsav/>

[34] <https://www.ancient.eu/The_Ramayana/>

[35] <http://www.sacred-texts.com/hin/rama/index.htm>