Pointed shoe}} ![](PointeShoes.jpg "fig:PointeShoes.jpg") for
cushioning, can be seen on the right foot.\]\] A **pointe shoe** is a
type of shoe worn by [ballet](ballet "wikilink") dancers when performing
[pointe work](pointe_technique "wikilink"). Pointe shoes were conceived
in response to the desire for dancers to appear weightless and
[sylph](sylph "wikilink")-like and have evolved to enable dancers to
dance *en pointe* (on the tips of their toes) for extended periods of
time. They are manufactured in a variety of colors, most commonly in
shades of light pink.

## History

<img src="Sylphide_-Marie_Taglioni_-1832_-2.jpg" title="fig:Sylphide_-Marie_Taglioni_-1832_-2.jpg" width="150" alt="Sylphide_-Marie_Taglioni_-1832_-2.jpg" />
in the title role of *La Sylphide*, a ballet danced entirely *en
pointe*\]\]

Women began to dance ballet in 1681, twenty years after King [Louis XIV
of France](Louis_XIV_of_France "wikilink") ordered the founding of the
[Académie Royale de Danse](Académie_Royale_de_Danse "wikilink"). At that
time, the standard women's ballet shoe had
[heels](heel_(shoe) "wikilink"). Mid-18th century dancer [Marie
Camargo](Marie_Camargo "wikilink") of the [Paris Opéra
Ballet](Paris_Opéra_Ballet "wikilink") was the first to wear a
non-heeled shoe, enabling her to perform leaps that would have been
difficult, if not impossible, in the more conventional shoes of the age.
After the [French Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink"), heels were
completely eliminated from standard ballet shoes. These flat-bottomed
predecessors of the modern pointe shoe were secured to the feet by
ribbons and incorporated pleats under the toes to enable dancers to
leap, execute turns, and fully extend their feet.

The first dancers to rise up on their toes did so with the help of an
invention by [Charles Didelot](Charles_Didelot "wikilink") in 1795. His
"flying machine" lifted dancers upward, allowing them to stand on their
toes before leaving the ground. This lightness and ethereal quality was
well received by audiences and, as a result,
[choreographers](choreographer "wikilink") began to look for ways to
incorporate more pointe work into their pieces.

As dance progressed into the 19th century, the emphasis on technical
skill increased, as did the desire to dance en pointe without the aid of
wires. When [Marie Taglioni](Marie_Taglioni "wikilink") first danced
*[La Sylphide](La_Sylphide "wikilink")* en pointe, her shoes were
nothing more than modified satin slippers; the soles were made of
leather and the sides and toes were darned to help the shoes hold their
shapes. Because the shoes of this period offered no support, dancers
would pad their toes for comfort and rely on the strength of their feet
and ankles for support.

The next substantially different form of pointe shoe appeared in
[Italy](Italy "wikilink") in the late 19th century. Dancers like
[Pierina Legnani](Pierina_Legnani "wikilink") wore shoes with a sturdy,
flat platform at the front end of the shoe, rather than the more sharply
pointed toe of earlier models. These shoes also included a box—made of
layers of fabric—for containing the toes, and a stiffer, stronger sole.
They were constructed without nails and the soles were only stiffened at
the toes, making them nearly silent.

The birth of the modern pointe shoe is often attributed to the early
20th-century Russian [ballerina](ballerina "wikilink") [Anna
Pavlova](Anna_Pavlova "wikilink"), who was one of the most famous and
influential dancers of her time. Pavlova had particularly high, arched
insteps, which left her vulnerable to injury when dancing en pointe. She
also had slender, tapered feet, which resulted in excessive pressure on
her big toes. To compensate for this, she inserted toughened leather
soles into her shoes for extra support and flattened and hardened the
toe area to form a box.

## Construction

![](Pointe_shoe_construction.png "fig:Pointe_shoe_construction.png")
Every dancer has unique feet, with variations that include toe length
and shape, arch [flexibility](flexibility_(anatomy) "wikilink"), and
[mechanical strength](mechanical_strength "wikilink"). Consequently,
most pointe shoe manufacturers produce more than one model of shoe, with
each model offering a different fit, as well as custom fitted shoes.
Regardless of the manufacturer or model, however, all pointe shoes share
two important [structural](structural "wikilink") features that enable
dancers to dance on the tips of their toes:

-   A *box* within the front end of the shoe that encases and supports
    the dancer's toes.
-   A *shank*, which is a piece of rigid material that serves to stiffen
    the sole so as to provide support for the
    [arch](arches_of_the_foot "wikilink") of the en pointe foot.

The exterior of a pointe shoe is covered with
[fabric](fabric "wikilink"), thus concealing the box and other internal
structural elements and lending an aesthetically pleasing look to the
shoe. Most pointe shoes are covered with [satin](satin "wikilink"), but
some are available with [canvas](canvas "wikilink") exteriors. Pointe
shoes are most often available in light pink colors and less commonly in
black and white. When other colors are desired (e.g., to match a
costume), pointe shoes may be dyed or, if available, ordered in custom
colors.

The *vamp* refers to the shoe's upper piece, measured from the platform
to the drawstring; normally, longer toes call for a longer vamp. The
*throat* is the edge of the vamp above the arch of the foot; it is
usually either v-shaped or round, which tend to suit feet with higher or
lower arches, respectively. The *drawstring* is located within the
binding on the throat; this may be made from either elastic or lace.

### Box

![](pointe_shoe_toe_box.jpg "fig:pointe_shoe_toe_box.jpg") The box is a
rigid enclosure within the front end of the shoe that encases and
supports the dancer's toes.[1] The front end of the box is flattened so
as to form a platform upon which the dancer can
[balance](balance_(ability) "wikilink"), and fabric covers the exterior
of the box for aesthetics.

In conventional pointe shoes, the box is typically made from tightly
packed layers of paper and fabric that have been glued together and then
shaped into an enclosure.[2] When the glue dries, it becomes hard and
provides the required stiffness. In some newer pointe shoes, the box may
be made from plastic and rubber, with rigidity provided by the
plastic.[3]

Box shapes vary widely among shoe models and manufacturers. A number of
shape attributes, including box length, height, taper angle and platform
area, determine the suitability of a shoe for any particular foot.[4]

### Sole

![](pointe_shoe_sole.jpg "pointe_shoe_sole.jpg")

For most pointe shoes, the [sole](sole_(shoe) "wikilink") is constructed
from a piece of [leather](leather "wikilink") that is attached to the
shoe with [adhesive](adhesive "wikilink") and reinforced by
[stitching](Stitch_(textile_arts) "wikilink") along its edges.[5] The
sole overlaps and secures the unfinished edges of the shoe's exterior
fabric. Pointe shoes may be manufactured with either scraped soles,
which provide superior [traction](traction_(engineering) "wikilink"), or
buffed soles, which have a smoother surface for reduced traction.

Aesthetic appearance is of paramount importance for modern pointe shoes.
To achieve an elegant appearance, the shoe's more decorative outer
fabric is prominently featured, covering the maximum possible area of
the shoe's visible surfaces. To this end, the sole is made of thin
material to give it a minimal profile, and a margin of satin is artfully
pleated around it so that the sole covers only part of the bottom of the
shoe.

### Shank

![](pointe_shoe_shank_masked.jpg "fig:pointe_shoe_shank_masked.jpg")
Shanks are typically made from [leather](leather "wikilink"),
[plastic](plastic "wikilink"), [cardstock](cardstock "wikilink"), or
layers of glue-hardened [burlap](burlap "wikilink"). The flexibility of
a shank is determined by its thickness and the type of material used. A
shank's thickness may be consistent throughout or it may vary along its
length to produce different strengths at select points. For example,
slits may be cut across a shank at demi-pointe to enhance roll through.
Also, a shank's thickness may transition at some point along its length
in order to implement differing strengths above and below the
transition. Standard pointe shoes typically have a full shank, in which
the shank runs the full length of the sole, or
[fractional](fraction_(mathematics) "wikilink") (e.g., half or
three-quarter) length shanks. Many pointe shoe manufacturers offer a
choice of shank materials, and some will build shoes with customized
shanks of varying stiffness and length.

Dancers will sometimes wear different pointe shoe models for different
performance pieces. In such cases, the
[choreography](choreography "wikilink") often dictates the type of shank
required; a lyrical style may call for a softer shoe, while an
aggressive style with many turns is more easily performed in a hard,
stiff shoe.

### Ribbons and elastic band

![](pointe_shoe_ribbons.jpg "fig:pointe_shoe_ribbons.jpg") A pointe shoe
employs two fabric [ribbons](ribbons "wikilink") and an
[elastic](elasticity_(physics) "wikilink") band to secure it to the
foot. Most of the work of securing shoes to feet is done by the ribbons.
The two ribbons wrap around the dancer's [ankle](ankle "wikilink") in
opposite directions, overlapping one another so as to form a cross at
the front. The ends are then tied together in a [knot](knot "wikilink"),
which is then tucked under the ribbon on the inside of the ankle to hide
it from view.

The elastic band—which traverses the front of the ankle below the
ribbons—keeps the [heel](heel "wikilink") of the shoe in place against
the foot when the dancer is en pointe. Optionally, two overlapped
elastic bands may be used on each shoe to increase tension and holding
power.

The locations where the band and ribbons attach to a shoe is critical,
as incorrect placement can result in a poorly fitting shoe.[6] Some
dancers choose to sew the ribbons and elastics onto the inside of the
shoe, whereas others sew them outside onto the silk exterior. Typically,
the loose ends of newly sewn ribbons are briefly exposed to open flames
to melt them and thus prevent fraying.

### Demi-pointe shoe

A *demi-pointe* shoe, which is also variously called a *break-down*,
*pre-pointe*, or a *soft-block* shoe, shares many characteristics with
pointe shoes. For example, its outer appearance resembles that of a
pointe shoe and it has a toe box, although the box is softer and the
wings (sides of the toe box) are typically not as deep as those found on
pointe shoes. Demi-pointe shoes are secured to the feet with ribbons and
elastic band in identical fashion to pointe shoes. Unlike pointe shoes,
however, demi-pointe shoes have no shank and, as a result, they do not
provide the support necessary for proper pointe work.

Demi-pointe shoes are most often used to train dancers who are new to
pointe technique. They serve to acclimate dancers to the feel of wearing
pointe shoes and to strengthen the ankles and feet in preparation for
dancing en pointe in pointe shoes. The toe box allows the dancer to
experience the feel of a pointe shoe, while the insole and outsole work
together to provide the resistance needed for developing foot and ankle
strength.

## Manufacturing process

Traditional pointe shoes are usually manufactured using a method known
as *turnshoe*, in which each shoe is initially assembled inside-out on a
[last](last "wikilink") and then turned right-side-out before
finishing.[7] When manufacturing standard pointe shoes, a standardized,
common last is used for both left and right shoes, resulting in
identical left and right shoes in a pair. Some ballerinas have
custom-made lasts that replicate the shapes of their own feet; these may
be supplied to a pointe shoe manufacturer for the purpose of
manufacturing custom shoes.

## Breaking in

Dancers typically "break in" new pointe shoes to reduce or eliminate the
discomfort they commonly cause. Typically this is done by performing
releves and eleves that flex the boxes and shanks in a natural manner,
thus causing the box shape and shank flex points to adapt to the
dancer's feet.[8] Various other methods have been employed for breaking
in pointe shoes, including deforming them with hands or against hard
surfaces, striking them on hard surfaces, and moistening or heating the
boxes to soften the [glues](glue "wikilink"), but these methods
typically are ineffective as they do not cause the shoes to conform to
the feet and also may damage the shoes or shorten their usable
lifetimes.[9]

## Accessories

A dancer may experience discomfort while wearing a pointe shoe even
after the shoe has been broken in. Several devices are commonly used to
mitigate the discomfort:

-   *Toe pads* are pouches that encapsulate and cushion the toes from
    the unyielding box and prevent friction that can cause blistering.
    These are typically made from thin, fabric-covered gel sheets.
-   Gel *toe spacers* of various shapes and sizes are inserted between
    toes; these serve to adjust toe spacing and alignment so as to
    alleviate pain at the bunion joint between the big toe and first
    toe.
-   *Lambswool* is stretched and wrapped around toes to reduce chafing
    and the likelihood of blisters. After several uses, the lambswool
    becomes densely packed and custom fitted to the dancer's foot.
-   *Tape* is wrapped around toes to reduce chafing and blisters.
-   *Blister pads* are small gel squares that prevent damage from
    rubbing and friction.

## Lifetime

In the course of normal use, there are three predominant types of wear
on a pointe shoe that will determine its useful
[lifetime](service_life "wikilink"). The most important of these is
shank wear. As the body of the shoe is repetitively flexed, the shank
gradually weakens and loses its ability to provide support. A pointe
shoe is no longer serviceable when the shank breaks or becomes too soft
to provide support. The second is the softening of the box and
especially the platform on which the dancer balances.

The other primary type of wear involves the exterior fabric. In pointe
work the front face and bottom edge of the toe box are subjected to
friction against the performance surface. This friction will eventually
wear through the shoe's outer fabric covering, thereby exposing the toe
box and creating loose, frayed fabric edges. Unlike a weakened shank,
damaged outer fabric does not affect the performance of a shoe. Due to
its unprofessional appearance, however, damaged fabric may render the
shoe unfit to wear in situations other than informal practice or
rehearsal. ![](pointe_shoe_wear.jpg "fig:pointe_shoe_wear.jpg")

Under moderate usage, a pair of pointe shoes will typically last through
ten to twenty hours of wear. For dance students, this often translates
into weeks or months of serviceable use from a pair of pointe shoes.
Professional dancers typically wear out pointe shoes much more quickly;
a new pair may wear out in a single performance. For example, in 2013
[New York City Ballet](New_York_City_Ballet "wikilink") ordered 8,500
pairs (for 180 dancers)[10][11] and [the Royal
Ballet](the_Royal_Ballet "wikilink") used approximately 12,000 pairs of
pointe shoes.[12][13]

The lifetime of a pointe shoe depends on many factors, including:

-   **Usage**. More aggressive dance styles and more frequent, longer
    durations of use will hasten wear.
-   **Dance technique**. Improper technique subjects shoes to unusual
    stresses that may lead to premature failure.
-   **Fit**. Well fitting pointe shoes encourage proper technique, which
    in turn leads to longer shoe life.
-   **Weight**. Greater dancer weight exerts proportionally greater
    stresses to the shoes, leading to faster wear.
-   **Construction**. Varying qualities and types of construction will
    yield different life expectancies.
-   **Shank material**. The stiffness and integrity of various shank
    materials will degrade at varying rates.
-   **Breaking-in**. The breaking-in process simulates accelerated wear,
    and thus may shorten the life of a shoe.
-   **Performance surface**. Rough surfaces cause rapid wear of the
    exterior fabric, in contrast to smooth surfaces such as [Marley
    floors](Marley_floor "wikilink"), which minimize the rate of fabric
    wear.
-   **Foot Strength**. Stronger arch muscles exert greater force on the
    shank, causing it to bend more and thus accelerating its wear.

## See also

-   [Ballet shoe](Ballet_shoe "wikilink")
-   [Dori shoes](Dori_shoes "wikilink") (heeled pointe shoes)
-   [Pointe shoe
    manufacturers](:Category:Pointe_shoe_manufacturers "wikilink")
-   [Pointe technique](Pointe_technique "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Dance shoes](Category:Dance_shoes "wikilink") [Category:Ballet
terminology](Category:Ballet_terminology "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]