![](Racing_Flats.jpg "fig:Racing_Flats.jpg") **Racing flats**, or simply
flats, are lightweight [athletic shoes](athletic_shoes "wikilink")
designed for "long distance" [track and
field](track_and_field "wikilink"), [cross
country](Cross_country_running "wikilink"), and most often, [road
races](Road_running "wikilink"). They differ from normal training shoes
mainly by the lack of a substantial heel (hence the name).

Flats are more lightweight than regular running sneakers so they do not
last as long. In 2014 some racing flats weighed as little as 3 oz (85 g)
as companies competed to generate the lightest racing flat.[1] Their
soles get worn down faster and therefore they have shorter natural
lives. In 1977 Jim Fixx's Onitsuka Tiger racing flats were seen on the
front page of his book entitled "The Complete Book of Running". This
book was a #1 best seller.[2]

They are mostly sold as "for use up to 10k", but are used by some
runners at any distance, including
[ultramarathons](ultramarathon "wikilink").

## Construction

Racing flats have only small or no heel lift, and little padding or
support. The heel lift of flats ranges from 4mm to 10mm which is closer
to the heel lift seen in trainers. They allow a prepared athlete to use
their natural foot strength, elasticity, and
[proprioception](proprioception "wikilink") to run quickly.[3]

A typical flat consists of a nearly flat sole, and a minimal upper to
hold it onto the foot. Frequently the thin insole is glued in place to
reduce movement and weight. The sole is constructed of two materials: an
engineered lightweight foam upper sole attached to a hard rubber base.
The uppers are often mesh so that moisture can escape, even on
crosscountry variants.

Racing flats vary in weight, ranging from 230g (7-8 oz) down to the mere
70g (2.46 oz) of the women's New Balance 5000.[4] Reducing the weight to
obtain the natural feel for a runner can result in a shorter lifetime
for the shoe. In general racing flats will last fewer miles before
wearing out compared to trainers. A typical racing flat will last for
about 150–300 miles.[5]

### Minimalism

Racing flats were predominantly used before the invention of high heeled
and cushioned running shoes in the early 1970s. Before the invention of
the cushioned [Nike](Nike,_Inc. "wikilink") shoes in the 1970s, all
runners used flats because that was the only shoe available for road
running.[6] The goal in the shift towards higher-heeled and softer
midsole shoes was to reduce stress on joints and improve arch support.
High support shoes are still prevalent in many current running shoe
models, however, many long-distance road runners began to transition
back to the minimalist racing flat shoe in the early 2000s.[7]

![](Saucony_Racing_Flat.jpg "fig:Saucony_Racing_Flat.jpg") Studies[8]
have suggested that some running injuries can occur as a result of the
significant arch support and cushioning found in "traditional" running
shoes. As a result, a growing number of runners train and race
exclusively in racing flats, other minimalist shoes, or
[barefoot](Barefoot_running "wikilink"). This trend is known as
minimalism. Running with minimalist shoes is useful to strengthen
important muscle groups and improve running technique over time.

### Uses

Because of the lack of support and cushioning in racing flats, they are
typically not recommended for use by beginner runners or those who are
not competing because of their lack of lower leg/foot strength. Studies
show the locations of the load and pressure on different areas of the
foot when using training shoes versus racing flats. The style of the
shoes can alter the stress on the runner's foot and one should consider
this when determining the best shoes for their personal level of
skill.[9] As an athlete progresses with their training, they will be
able to use racing flats more safely and effectively.

## Manufacturers

Popular examples of racing flats include the
[Saucony](Saucony "wikilink") Type A6, Saucony Fastwitch 5, Merrell Road
Glove, Nike Zoom Streak, Nike Zoom Marathoner, Nike Lunaracer, Nike
Flyknit Racer, Nike LunarSpider, Nike Mayfly,
[Adidas](Adidas "wikilink") Adizero PR, Adizero RC,
[Asics](ASICS "wikilink") DS Racer 10, Asics Piranha SP 4,
[Puma](Puma_SE "wikilink") Taper, [Mizuno](Mizuno_Corp. "wikilink") Wave
Universe 5, and numerous others.

## See also

-   [Comparison of orthotics](Comparison_of_orthotics "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Athletic shoes](Category:Athletic_shoes "wikilink")
[Category:Sport of athletics
terminology](Category:Sport_of_athletics_terminology "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7] Douglas, Scott, (2013) Runner's World Complete Guide to Minimalism
and Barefoot Running.

[8]

[9] Wiegerinck, Johannes; Boyd, Jennifer; Yoder, Jordan C; Abbey, Alicia
N; Nunley, James A; Queen, Robin M. (January 14, 2009). Differences in
plantar loading between training shoes and racing flats at a
self-selected running speed. Gait and Posture. Volume 3. Issue 29. Pages
514-519. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2008.12.001>