![](Fieldboots.jpg "Fieldboots.jpg")

A **riding boot** is a [boot](boot "wikilink") made to be used for
[horse riding](equestrianism "wikilink"). The classic boot comes high
enough up the leg to prevent the leathers of the
[saddle](saddle "wikilink") from pinching the leg of the rider, has a
sturdy toe to protect the rider's foot when on the ground and has a
distinct heel to prevent the foot from sliding through the
[stirrup](stirrup "wikilink"). The sole is smooth or lightly textured to
avoid being caught on the tread of the stirrup in the event of a fall.

The modern riding boot is relatively low-[heeled](heel "wikilink"), with
a heel of less than one inch, though historically a higher heel was
common, as it has always been critically important for riding boots to
prevent the foot from slipping through the
[stirrup](stirrup "wikilink"). Today, only some styles of [cowboy
boot](cowboy_boot "wikilink") retain a higher heel than other modern
riding boots.

## English riding designs

For the riding disciplines that fall into the category of [English
riding](English_riding "wikilink"), there are a number of different
styles of riding boots, intended for different styles of riding, from
[horse shows](horse_show "wikilink"), to [pleasure
riding](pleasure_riding "wikilink"). Tall boots, which end just below
the knee of the rider, include field, dress, and hunt boots. These are
standard show apparel, worn by all competitors in the hunter/jumper and
dressage disciplines. A lower, paddock boot that stops just above the
ankle, is worn by children, by some show competitors in the UK,
Australia, and by those that show [Saddle seat](Saddle_seat "wikilink").

**Field boots**: so called because they were traditionally worn by
officers ranked "[field grade](Field_Grade_Officers "wikilink")" or
higher, have lacing at the [vamp](shoe "wikilink"), which allows for
some give so the rider is more comfortable riding with the highly flexed
ankle that develops from the shorter stirrup length required for work
over fences. Therefore, field boots are preferred in all jumping
disciplines, including [Hunt seat](Hunt_seat "wikilink")
[equitation](equitation "wikilink"), [show
jumping](show_jumping "wikilink"), [fox
hunting](fox_hunting "wikilink"), and both jumping phases in
[eventing](eventing "wikilink"). They are also worn by [police
officers](police_officers "wikilink") riding motorcycles or on
[mounted](police_horse "wikilink") patrols, and by some
[police](police "wikilink") agencies as part of their "Class A" uniform
or with ceremonial mounted units. The majority of field boots are black,
although brown-colored boots may also be purchased.[1]

**Dress boots**: do not have lacing at the ankle, and are generally
stiffer. They are worn by [dressage](dressage "wikilink") riders,
[eventers](eventer "wikilink") in the dressage phase, and at formal [fox
hunts](fox_hunting "wikilink"). They are also worn by riders of [show
jumpers](show_jumper "wikilink"). Dress boots are traditionally black in
color.[2] A recent fad is dress boots for dressage that are cut to go
extra high on the outside of the knee.

![](Paddockboots.jpg "Paddockboots.jpg")

**Hunt boots**, or **Top boots**: like the dress boot, except it has a
"cuff" at the top. The boot is usually black, with a tan cuff
(traditional for male riders). It is appropriate for [fox
hunting](fox_hunting "wikilink").[3]

![](HalfChaps1.jpg "HalfChaps1.jpg")

**Paddock boots**, also known as **[Jodhpur
boots](Jodhpur_boot "wikilink")**, are short boots that come just above
the ankle, used most often for pleasure riding and everyday use.[4] They
are also required for [Saddle seat](Saddle_seat "wikilink") style
riding[5] and are frequently worn by children when showing in [hunt
seat](hunt_seat "wikilink") disciplines because they are less costly for
rapidly growing children than are tall boots. They are sometimes
combined with [half chaps](chaps "wikilink"), a type of
[gaiter](gaiter "wikilink") also known as chapettes, for added
protection or to give the visual impression of a tall boot. The lace-up
style is primarily seen in [hunt seat](hunt_seat "wikilink") riding,
whereas the elastic-sided [Chelsea boot](Chelsea_boot "wikilink") design
is seen in both hunt seat and saddle seat disciplines. The elastic side
boot is also commonly used in Australia as a riding boot and dress boot.
They are part of the required attire in [Australian Stock
Horse](Australian_Stock_Horse "wikilink") turnout competitions and for
[Pony Club](Pony_Club "wikilink") riding. Heavier versions, such as
[Blundstone](Blundstone "wikilink") boots, are made for general work and
gardening but are not suitable for riding owing to their heavy,
deep-grooved soles.

Field boots (and many paddock boots) have an extra layer of leather on
the toe, called a toe cap. All styles have somewhat tapered, round toes.
Current styles include zip-on boots, with a zipper running down the back
of the calf of a tall boot or the front of a paddock boot, making them
easier to put on and remove without aid of boot hooks or a [boot
jack](boot_jack "wikilink").

Brown tall boots (field or dress) were somewhat more common before
[World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), when the English riding habit
lost popularity outside of formal and/or [horse
show](horse_show "wikilink") events. The [U.S.
Army](U.S._Army "wikilink"), whose officers had worn high brown boots in
[World War I](World_War_I "wikilink"), abandoned the practice by the
late 1930s. For a time, some show sanctioning organizations did not
allow brown boots, considering them to be casual attire, although the
rule has been relaxed somewhat.

## Cowboy boots

![](Blackcowboyboots.jpg "fig:Blackcowboyboots.jpg")

For [western riding](western_riding "wikilink") and
[showing](horse_show "wikilink"), western riders wear [cowboy
boots](cowboy_boot "wikilink"), with either the high "cowboy" or
"riding" heel; the intermediate, somewhat lower "walking" heel; or the
low, "roper" style heel that is similar to that of English boots. The
uppers may vary in height. The lowest is the "roper" style that stops
just a bit above the ankle, about an inch or so higher than the English
paddock boot. The most classic length is the mid-calf height that keeps
the fenders of a [western saddle](western_saddle "wikilink") from
chafing the ankle and calf of the rider. The tallest cowboy boots are
seldom seen outside of fashion venues, but have an upper that reaches
nearly to the knee, are usually extensively decorated, but in the modern
day are seldom used for actual horse riding. For pleasure riding,
lace-up or zip-up boots similar to English paddock boots, have become
popular in recent years, though the classic pull-on boot still is
common. Cowboy boots are traditionally made of smooth cowhide, though
occasionally a boot style may be of a [suede](suede "wikilink") or
"roughout" look. However, the uppers of more expensive designs may be
made of leather obtained from somewhat exotic creatures, including
alligator, ostrich and snakeskin.[6]

## Materials

![](HooksAndBootjack.jpg "fig:HooksAndBootjack.jpg") is often helpful
when removing them\]\]

Traditionally, English riding boots are made of smooth leather, usually
cowhide, or occasionally pigskin, and most show boots remain thus due to
the classic look. However, synthetic leather, vinyl and other materials
are becoming more common. Quality of leather varies, with softer,
finer-quality increasing the value of the boot. For formal wear, [patent
leather](patent_leather "wikilink") is occasionally seen, particularly
in jodhpur boots designed for [saddle seat](saddle_seat "wikilink")
[horse show](horse_show "wikilink") classes held after 6:00 pm, when
formal attire may be worn in certain types of competition.

For casual riding, riders often wear well-worn show boots, but also may
take advantage of new boot designs modeled after the athletic shoe or
hiking boot that have been created, using space age synthetics and
breathable materials to create what essentially is a "tennis shoe with a
heel."

## References

[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Sports
footwear](Category:Sports_footwear "wikilink") [Category:Rider
apparel](Category:Rider_apparel "wikilink")

[1] Price, Steven D. (ed.) *The Whole Horse Catalog: Revised and
Updated* New York:Fireside 1998 p. 209-211

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] Crabtree, Helen K. *Saddle Seat Equitation: The Definitive Guide*
Revised Edition New York:Doubleday 1982 p. 92

[6]