## Overview

Rossi Boots is a South Australian boot manufacturer founded in 1910.
Today, the business employs more than 50 people and continues to operate
both the factory and headquarters in Kilburn, South Australia.

Rossiters PTY. LTD is still owned by the Rossiter family. Â

Over the 110-year history the business has made boots for a wide range
of people, industries and uses. Rossi Boots have a network of
distributors and ship more than 150,000 pairs of boots worldwide every
year.

## History

Rossi Boots started in 1910 when Arthur Edward Rossiter resigned from
his position as a supervisor at the Adelaide Boot Company and started
Rossiters Ltd in a small tin shed in his own backyard. Sales were
initially slow, but increased due the First World War.

A bigger and larger factory was needed so the first of three stages of
factory was built. The depression years were hard years and getting
orders proved difficult. During the Second World War Rossi Boots was a
major supplier to the military making hundreds of thousands of boots
which saw service in various theatres including New Guinea. The war
years saw the number of employees peak at around five hundred.

In the years after the war, materials were scarce and it was then when
the company introduced the concept of using old car tyres as a soling
for boots.

Gradually since then the methods of manufacturing footwear have changed
as petroleum based products such as glues, rubbers and plastics have
replaced the traditional ones of leather, nails and threads. More modern
machinery has been introduced than can directly mould soles to the
bottom of boots and can easily pull leather over a last.

At the end of 1987 the company moved from Unley to Hilton.Â  The move
allowed production to be carried out in a more modern, fit-for-purpose
factory. Since then the company has continued to change; introducing
computer controlled machines for cutting, sewing and attaching soles.
These changes occurred whilst many of Rossiâ€™s competitors moved
offshore. Whilst the introduction of these machines reduced the number
of local staff, it has enabled Rossi Boots to continue to manufacture in
Australia.

In March of 2019 Rossi Boots relocated the factory, warehouse and
headquarters from Hilton to Kilburn, South Australia. This move to a
new, expansive location allows Rossi Boots to continue to manufacture
boots in South Australia and continue to house all operations under one
roof.

## References

## External links

-   Sly, D. [Family business stays at
    home.](http://www.adelaidereview.com.au/archives.php?subaction=showfull&id=1193366390&archive=1194498997&start_from=&ucat=16&)
    *The Adelaide Review*
-   13 Jul 13 - [Defence snubs SA made Rossi Boots in favour of imports
    for defence
    workers](https://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/south-australia/defence-snubs-samade-rossi-boots-in-favour-of-imports-for-defence-workers/news-story/8c5e61c9f93c6a838a03f5ea11129bf6)
    *Adelaide Now\]*
-   21 Jul 15 - [Rossi Boots export grant after missing defence
    contract](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-07-22/rossi-boots-export-grant-after-missing-defence-contract/6639606)
    *ABC Online*
-   19 Apr 17 - [Rossi Boots lost a Federal Government contract and has
    called for a change to the
    system](https://www.adelaidenow.com.au/business/jobs/rossi-boots-lost-a-federal-government-contract-and-has-called-for-a-change-to-the-system/news-story/05952a9110e1bb803e74802186eca992)
    *Adelaide Now*
-   20 Apr 2017 - [Rossi Boots has received support from Labour MP Steve
    Georganas](https://www.adelaidenow.com.au/business/jobs/rossi-boots-has-received-support-from-labor-mp-steve-georganas-who-has-called-for-state-government-help/news-story/e9b009f1fe28d17555b34b4b3dbd1db3)
    *Adelaide Now*
-   8 Aug 2017 - [Rossi Boots third generation bootmaker and former
    Chairman Dean Rossiter passes
    away](https://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/south-australia/rossi-boots-third-generation-bootmaker-and-former-chairman-dean-rossiter-passes-away/news-story/4ba104b98d904f6da418d53ee1fba567)
    *Adelaide Now*

[Category:Manufacturing companies based in
Adelaide](Category:Manufacturing_companies_based_in_Adelaide "wikilink")
[Category:Shoe brands](Category:Shoe_brands "wikilink") [Category:Shoe
companies of Australia](Category:Shoe_companies_of_Australia "wikilink")