![](Woman_with_boot_flask.jpg "fig:Woman_with_boot_flask.jpg")**Russian
boot** is the name applied to a style of calf- or knee-length [fashion
boot](fashion_boot "wikilink") for women that was popular in the early
part of the 20th century. Russian boots fell out of favor in the 1930s,
but were the inspiration for the high-leg fashion boots that returned to
popularity in the 1950s and 60s. Today the term Russian boot is
sometimes applied to the style of low heeled boots worn by some folk
dancers.

## History

The original Russian boot was the *[valenki](valenki "wikilink")*, a
flat heeled, wide topped, knee-length boot worn by Russian soldiers.
Designed to combat the extremely cold Russian winters, valenki were
normally made of thick felt. The boots' uppers were loosely constructed
for convenience and comfort, which produced the style's distinctive
wrinkling effect around the ankles.[1] The term was later applied to
women’s boots in leather that appeared in the second decade of the 20th
century.

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, shoes with high uppers,
buttoned or laced and reaching to the lower calves, were common footwear
for women. Rising hemlines made longer styles of boots popular,
particularly when the alternative was exposure of the leg, which was
still considered shocking.[2] In 1913, Denise Poiret, wife of celebrated
French couturier Paul Poiret, caused a sensation in Paris and New York
by wearing knee-length boots in wrinkled Morocco leather. Designed by
her husband and made by the bottier Favereau, these boots were styled
with a low heel and a square toe; she had versions in red, white, green,
and yellow[3][4] In 1915 the *New York Times* reported that, partly
inspired by Mme. Poiret, these so-called "Russian boots" were becoming
an outré statement by some cutting-edge fashionable women.[5] However,
no boots of any kind caught on with the general public in these years,
women being accustomed to traditional high-top shoes, either laced or
buttoned.[6] Russian boots remained a forward fashion statement,
however, adopted by stage and film stars, including [Mary
Pickford](Mary_Pickford "wikilink"), [Irene
Castle](Irene_Castle "wikilink"), [Cécile
Sorel](Cécile_Sorel "wikilink") and [Gloria
Swanson](Gloria_Swanson "wikilink"), and endorsed by such leading
designers as the London-based [Lucile (Lady Duff
Gordon)](Lucy,_Lady_Duff-Gordon "wikilink"), who also famously wore them
herself.

From the mid-1910s into the early '20s, as hemlines rose from ankle
length to mid-calf, high-heeled Russian boots with pointe or rounded
toes, were increasingly popular.[7][8] They were available in a variety
of styles, calf- or knee-length, with a Cuban or Louis heel,[9][10]
which could be pull-on, or zip-fastened for a closer fit.[11] Worn with
calf-length and finally knee-length skirts, they often featured
decorative features such as elaborate stitching or fur trim.[12][13][14]
Russian boots were stylish throughout the 1920s as the fashionable
alternative to galoshes in winter. They also somehow acquired a racy
reputation, as the sort of footwear worn by girls who frequented saloon
bars and speakeasies.[15]

By the mid-1920s, British shoe manufacturers were reporting record
orders for high-legged women’s boots [16] and they were so popular that
they were being blamed for causing women to catch colds,[17] have
accidents in the street,[18] and even injure themselves.[19] Initially
popular in Britain, the new boot style quickly spread to Paris [20] and
the United States,[21] while English women in India complained that
Russian boots were not yet available in Bombay.[22] The emergence of
these tall boots for women was interpreted by some contemporary writers
as a consequence of women’s transition from the “leisure class” to the
world of business [23]

With increasing sales, however, complaints began to be made about the
poor quality of leather used in the cheaper pairs [24][25] which were
not adequately waterproofed and had a tendency to sag around the
ankle;[26] although manufacturers took steps to address issues of fit by
introducing taller, better fitting styles [27][28] this was ultimately
blamed for their decline in popularity.[29] Where protection from the
elements was needed, Russian boots were increasingly replaced by
fashionable variants of the rubber [Wellington
boot](Wellington_boot "wikilink").[30] Mass popularity was also seen as
a barrier to chic women adopting boots as a fashion item.[31][32]
Although they were still popular as late as the beginning of the
1930s,[33] within a few years Russian boots had fallen out of favor. It
was not until the 1950s that boots were again regarded as fashion items
for women.[34]

## Today

Russian boots were the inspiration for the modern [fashion
boot](fashion_boot "wikilink"), some of which closely resemble styles
that first appeared in the 1920s. The term “Russian boot” is usually
applied to the flat-heeled, calf-length boots popular with some
traditions of folk dancing, especially those from Eastern Europe. In
2009, The New York Times reported that the original felt *valenki* was
being reinvented as a fashion item in Russia [35]

## See also

-   [Boot](Boot "wikilink")
-   [Fashion boot](Fashion_boot "wikilink")
-   [Valenki](Valenki "wikilink")
-   [1920s in fashion](1920s_in_fashion "wikilink")

## References

[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]