![](NarmerPalette-CloseUpOfProcession-ROM.png "fig:NarmerPalette-CloseUpOfProcession-ROM.png"):
the sandal-bearer is the first from left to right.\]\]

A **sandal-bearer** is a person who bears the sandals of his
[superior](superior_(hierarchy) "wikilink"). The role existed in various
cultures and epochs, being first documented in Egypt's [Early Dynastic
Period](Early_Dynastic_Period_of_Egypt "wikilink") (c. [31st century
BC](31st_century_BC "wikilink")).

## In Antiquity

In [Ancient Egypt](Ancient_Egypt "wikilink") the role of sandal-bearer
was documented for the first time in history. A sandal-bearer is
depicted on the [Narmer Macehead](Narmer_Macehead "wikilink"), as well
as on both sides of the Narmer Palette, in which he is identified by a
rosette and a club as the servant of the king.[1] Based on
interpretations of these depictions, the sandal-bearer was possibly a
high-ranking official, accompanying the Pharaoh on important
occasions.[2][3] The sandal-bearer would also take on the role of feet
washer, a common task in ancient times.[4]

## In Medieval times

Sandal-bearers also existed in [Feudal Japan](Feudal_Japan "wikilink"),
being a position of relatively high status. Probably the most famous
person to take on this role in Japan was [Toyotomi
Hideyoshi](Toyotomi_Hideyoshi "wikilink"), during the [Sengoku
period](Sengoku_period "wikilink"). Being of humble origins, around 1557
he joined the [Oda clan](Oda_clan "wikilink"), then headed by [Oda
Nobunaga](Oda_Nobunaga "wikilink"), as a lowly servant.[5] He became one
of Nobunaga's sandal-bearers and was present at the [Battle of
Okehazama](Battle_of_Okehazama "wikilink") in 1560 when Nobunaga
defeated [Imagawa Yoshimoto](Imagawa_Yoshimoto "wikilink") to become one
of the most powerful [warlords](warlord "wikilink") in the Sengoku
period. After the death of Nobunaga, he secured a succession of high
imperial court titles including, in 1585, the prestigious position of
regent (*[kampaku](kampaku "wikilink")*).[6]

## References

<references />
[Category:Obsolete
occupations](Category:Obsolete_occupations "wikilink")
[Category:Sandals](Category:Sandals "wikilink")

[1] Ancient Egypt Online: [Narmer
Palette](http://www.ancientegyptonline.co.uk/Narmerpalette.html)

[2] [The Narmer Palette](http://www.ancient-egypt.org/index.html)

[3] [Analysis of royal sandals in ancient
Egypt](http://www.artofcounting.com/2010/07/14/analysis-of-royal-sandals-in-ancient-egypt-part-1/),
Part 1

[4] Douglas J. Brewer; *The Archaeology of Ancient Egypt: Beyond
Pharaohs*, p. 86

[5] Samurai Archives: [Toyotomi
Hideyoshi](http://www.samurai-archives.com/hideyoshi.html)

[6] [Berry, Mary Elizabeth. (1982). *Hideyoshi.* Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, pp.
168â€“181](https://books.google.com/books?id=HQTbDphPKmoC&pg=PA168#v=onepage&q=&f=false)