The **Silver Shoes** are the magical shoes that appear in [L. Frank
Baum](L._Frank_Baum "wikilink")'s 1900 novel *[The Wonderful Wizard of
Oz](The_Wonderful_Wizard_of_Oz "wikilink")* as heroine [Dorothy
Gale](Dorothy_Gale "wikilink")'s transport home. They are originally
owned by the [Wicked Witch of the
East](Wicked_Witch_of_the_East "wikilink") but passed to Dorothy when
her house lands on the Witch. At the end of the story, Dorothy uses the
shoes to transport her back to her home in Kansas, but when she arrives
at her destination finds the shoes had fallen off en route.

## Appearances in books

### *The Wonderful Wizard of Oz*

*The Wonderful Wizard of Oz* (1900) is the only book in the original
series to feature the Silver Shoes directly. They are the property of
the Wicked Witch of the East until Dorothy's house lands on and kills
her. They are then given to Dorothy by the [Good Witch of the
North](Good_Witch_of_the_North "wikilink"), who tells Dorothy that
"there is some charm connected with them; but what it is we never knew."
When Dorothy is captured by the [Wicked Witch of the
West](Wicked_Witch_of_the_West "wikilink"), she tries to steal the
shoes. She finally gets one by tricking Dorothy into tripping over an
invisible iron bar. Dorothy then melts the Witch with a bucket of water
and recovers the shoe. In the final chapters of the book,
[Glinda](Glinda_the_Good_Witch "wikilink") explains that the shoes can
transport the wearer anywhere they wish. If the Silver Shoes have any
other powers they are never outlined in the books, however the Witch of
the West was obsessed with obtaining them, as they would give her much
greater power than any other thing she possessed, suggesting the shoes
hold immense magic. After saying goodbye to her friends, Dorothy knocks
her heels together three times, and commands the Shoes to carry her
home. When Dorothy opens her eyes, she has arrived in Kansas. She finds
that the shoes are gone, having fallen off during her flight and landing
somewhere in the [Deadly Desert](Deadly_Desert "wikilink"). Though they
are mentioned several times in sequels, they never appear again in the
original series.

### *The Wizard of the Emerald City*

In [Alexander Melentyevich
Volkov](Alexander_Melentyevich_Volkov "wikilink")'s *[The Wizard of the
Emerald City](The_Wizard_of_the_Emerald_City "wikilink")* (1939), the
Silver shoes or Serebryaniye bashmachki as they are called in the
manuscript, are the source of Elly's (his version of Dorothy) protection
instead of the good Witch's kiss. She is therefore attacked once by an
Ogre when removing them, and afterward wears them even when she sleeps.
They are not taken from the Witch's body, but rather brought by Toto
from her dwelling (a dark cave). This was possibly done to avert the
problem of a person wearing the shoes to be impossible to harm, since in
that book the hurricane is created by the Wicked Witch to destroy
mankind, and redirected upon her by the Good Witch of the North, who
suffers no ill effects for harming her. It is said the Witch only wore
the shoes on very special occasions. They are lost just like in Baum's
book.

### *Dorothy of Oz*

In [Roger S. Baum](Roger_S._Baum "wikilink")'s *[Dorothy of
Oz](Dorothy_of_Oz_(book) "wikilink")* (1989), Glinda recovers the silver
shoes and presents them to Dorothy. They have enough power remaining
that Dorothy can travel once more to Oz and back to Kansas.

### *Wicked: The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West*

In *[Wicked: The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the
West](Wicked:_The_Life_and_Times_of_the_Wicked_Witch_of_the_West "wikilink")*
(1995), the silver shoes are a gift to [Nessarose](Nessarose "wikilink")
(the Wicked Witch of the East) before she and her sister,
[Elphaba](Elphaba "wikilink") (the Wicked Witch of the West) start
college. They are made by her father using special glass beads another
man (Turtle Heart, possibly her biological father) taught him to make,
which make the shoes shiny and iridescent, not necessarily a true
silver. They are later enchanted by Glinda (the Good Witch of the North)
to give Nessarose the necessary balance to walk. In the
[Broadway](Broadway_theatre "wikilink") [musical adaption of the
book](Wicked_(musical) "wikilink"), Elphaba is the one who enchants the
shoes. Her spell makes the silver shoes burn red hot, turning them into
the [ruby slippers](ruby_slippers "wikilink").

## Appearances in film

### *Wizard of Oz* (1925 film)

The shoes were absent from the [1925
movie](Wizard_of_Oz_(1925_film) "wikilink").

### *The Wizard of Oz* (1939 film)

In the [1939 movie](The_Wizard_of_Oz_(1939_film) "wikilink") the shoes
served the same purpose as in the book but were changed to red by its
screenwriter [Noel Langley](Noel_Langley "wikilink"). He gave a notably
different appearance than in Denslow's illustrations. In addition to the
silver shoes' powers, the Ruby slippers in the film were magically
protected from being removed from the feet of the person wearing them
unless said person is dead

### *The Wiz*

In *[The Wiz](The_Wiz_(film) "wikilink")* (1978), the shoes are silver
[high heels](High-heeled_footwear "wikilink"). This movie gives further
insight into the shoe's magical protection. When Evillene (the witch of
the west) tries to obtain them magically, her fingers are bent painfully
backwards.

### *The Wizard of Oz* (1982 film)

In the [anime movie](The_Wizard_of_Oz_(1982_film) "wikilink"), the shoes
are once again transformed into the ruby slippers, though they are never
referred to by that name. They are heeled shoes with pointed, slightly
curled toes, similar to their appearance in Denslow's illustrations.
Unlike the book, the shoes are still on Dorothy's feet when she arrives
in Kansas.

### *Return to Oz*

In *[Return to Oz](Return_to_Oz "wikilink")* (1985), the Ruby Slippers
are used once again. In this movie, the slippers have more power than
simply transporting people. They allow the [Nome
King](Nome_King "wikilink") to conquer Oz and turn every one in [the
Emerald City](Emerald_City "wikilink") to stone. Dorothy later uses the
shoes to reverse this process. This extra power is due to the fact the
slippers replace the Nome King's [Magic Belt](Magic_Belt "wikilink"). In
the original draft of the script, the Nome King had refashioned the
slippers into the actual Magic Belt from the novels. Upon his death,
they reverted into the form of slippers. This was cut from the final
filming of the movie.

### *The Muppets' Wizard of Oz*

In *[The Muppets' Wizard of Oz](The_Muppets'_Wizard_of_Oz "wikilink")*
(2005), the Silver Shoes are portrayed as sparkling, bejeweled, glittery
[Manolo Blahnik](Manolo_Blahnik "wikilink")
[high-heels](High-heeled_footwear "wikilink"). The laws of ownership are
again displayed in that the Witch of the West tries to cut off Dorothy's
feet to obtain the shoes. Once again the shoes remain on Dorothy's feet
when she arrives home.

## Appearances in television

### *The Wonderful Wizard of Oz* (1986 anime)

When first seen on the feet of the Witch of the East in the [1986 anime
version](The_Wonderful_Wizard_of_Oz_(1986_TV_series) "wikilink"), they
are brown peasant's shoes. When the Witch of the North then magically
transfers them to Dorothy's feet, they take on the appearance of white
slip-on shoes. When Dorothy is forced to give one of the shoes to the
Witch of the West, it reverts to the peasant form. After the Witch is
melted and Dorothy is shown wearing it again, it has returned to its
white form.

The shoes are used twice after they initially send Dorothy home. The
first time, she is holding them in her hands when she clicks the heels
and drops them. Consequently, Dorothy is transported to Oz and the shoes
are left in Kansas (Glinda sends her home). The second time occurs while
Dorothy is sleeping. [Tik-Tok](Tik-Tok_(Oz) "wikilink") is emitting a
[distress signal](distress_signal "wikilink") and the shoes activate,
transporting Dorothy to the Land of Ev in a [beam of
light](Light_beam "wikilink"). Her clothes are changed in mid flight.

### *The Wizard of Oz* (TV series)

In the 1990 *[The Wizard of
Oz](The_Wizard_of_Oz_(TV_series) "wikilink")* television series, the
Ruby Slippers are used to transport Dorothy back to Oz. They are
depicted to possess other powerful magical capabilities that Dorothy did
not fully understand, and as such, often served as a form of [deus ex
machina](deus_ex_machina "wikilink") against hopeless situations. They
are no longer depicted as high heels.

A unique concept proposed by this series is that the Ruby Slippers'
magic is linked to the glow of their red coloration. Their powers only
function while a dim glow of red light emanates from them, initiated by
Dorothy clicking her heels; and the effects of their magic immediately
cease after the shoes cease to glow. Also, the Wicked Witch was once
able to annul their abilities entirely, by capturing a red Luminary
(teardrop-shaped creatures who control all color in Oz) and forcing him
to drain the red color from the slippers themselves. However the
slippers regained their powers after the Luminary escaped.

This series also proposes that the slippers do not necessarily have to
be on the user's feet for their powers to work, as Dorothy once used
them by tapping the heels together when she held the shoes in her hands
(since the ground's sandy surface prevented her from clicking the heels
together).

Also worth noting in a single episode, is that Truckle, the series' lead
Flying Monkey, was once able to wear the Ruby Slippers and thus utilize
their powerful magic for his own whims. Even with his generally dim wits
and reckless disregard, the slippers gave him sufficient power to
overwhelm the [Wicked Witch of the
West](Wicked_Witch_of_the_West "wikilink")'s magical attacks, and
temporarily reduce her to his servant. This once again demonstrates that
the shoes' users need not be a skilled/knowledgeable spellcaster, in
order to gain great power. The Cowardly Lion also gets to wear them
briefly.

### *Once Upon a Time* (TV series)

In the *[Once Upon a Time](Once_Upon_a_Time_(TV_series) "wikilink")*
television series, the Silver Slippers are first alluded to in "The
Doctor", when Rumpelstiltskin sends the Mad Hatter to the Land of Oz in
order to locate and retrieve the shoes so that he could travel to the
Land without Magic in order to locate his lost son Balefire.

In "It's Not Easy Being Green", shortly before "The Doctor", Zelena, the
woman who would eventually become the Wicked Witch of the West, goes to
the Wizard in order to seek out her family. Upon discovering that she
was abandoned by her mother, Cora, and that her half-sister, Regina
became Queen and was being trained by Rumpelstiltskin, the Wizard gives
Zelena the shoes so that she can travel to the Enchanted Forest to try
and replace Regina as Rumpelstiltskin's student. Upon being rejected by
him, Zelena turns green with envy. She mocks Rumpelstiltskin with the
power of the Silver Slippers, thus causing his later desire to obtain
them. Using the Silver Slippers again she returns to Oz and dethrones
the Wizard.

In "Kansas" the Slippers appear again, as Zelena, posing as the Wizard
of Oz, gives Dorothy the Silver Slippers in order to send her back to
Kansas, in the hopes that it would keep Dorothy from becoming a powerful
witch herself, and from defeating and replacing Zelena as the Witch of
the West.

In "Our Decay", an adult Dorothy has returned to Oz via the Slippers to
face down Zelena and rescue the Scarecrow from her.

In "Ruby Slippers", the Silver Slippers appear one last time, enabling
travel between the Underworld and Oz so that Ruby (Red Riding Hood) can
rescue Dorothy from a sleeping curse Zelena has placed her under.
Zelena, who is trying to change her ways gives the Slippers over to the
heroes so Ruby and Snow White can make their way back to Oz.

## Appearances in other media

### *Dorothy of Oz*

The *[Dorothy of Oz](Dorothy_of_Oz_(manhwa) "wikilink")* series
completely revamps the Silver Shoes. They are instead depicted as red
boots created by Selluriah, the Witch of the East. When Mara (codename
Dorothy) stomps the heels of said boots, she takes on the form and
powers of a witch. This power is channeled (rather inexpertly) through
the staff Thrysos. The transformation is rather embarrassing, as it
involves Mara being momentarily nude and various men are always apt to
spot her. It is yet to be revealed if these boots will help Mara return
home.

### *Fables*

The shoes are shown in the [DC comics
Vertigo](Vertigo_(DC_Comics) "wikilink") series
*[Fables](Fables_(comics) "wikilink")*.
[Dorothy](List_of_Fables_characters#Dorothy "wikilink"), who's portrayed
as a cold, merciless assassin, found that she enjoyed killing after
being hired by the Wizard to kill the Witch of the West. However, she
loses them on the way back to Kansas over the Deadly Desert, and goes to
great lengths to get them back. She has several encounters with
[Fabletown](Fabletown "wikilink") spy
[Cinderella](List_of_Fables_characters#Cinderella "wikilink"), which
climaxes with them facing off in the mini-series *Cinderella: Fables Are
Forever*. After deducing that they are actually too big to fit Dorothy,
Cinderella takes them and pushes her out of an airship over the Deadly
Desert to her apparent death, though her body is not seen. Cinderella
then looks over the shoes and decides they're just the right size to fit
her.

## References

[Category:Oz (franchise)](Category:Oz_(franchise) "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Fictional
footwear](Category:Fictional_footwear "wikilink") [Category:Magical
objects](Category:Magical_objects "wikilink")