**Ski boots** are [footwear](footwear "wikilink") used in
[skiing](skiing "wikilink") to provide a way to attach the skier to
[skis](ski "wikilink") using [ski bindings](ski_binding "wikilink"). The
ski/boot/binding combination is used to effectively transmit control
inputs from the skier's legs to the snow.

## History

![](SMOM_Bass_boot.JPG "SMOM_Bass_boot.JPG")

Ski boots were [leather](leather "wikilink") winter boots, held to the
ski with leather straps. As skiing became more specialized, so too did
ski boots, leading to the splitting of designs between those for [alpine
skiing](alpine_skiing "wikilink") and [cross-country
skiing](cross-country_skiing_(sport) "wikilink").[1]

Modern skiing developed as an all-round sport with uphill, downhill and
cross-country portions. The introduction of the [cable
binding](cable_binding "wikilink") started a parallel evolution of
binding and boot. The binding looped a strap around the back of the boot
to hold it forward into a metal cup at the toe.[2] Boots with the sole
extended rearward to produce a flange for the cable to firmly latch to
become common, as did designs with semi-circular indentations on the
heel for the same purpose.

Effective cross-country skiing requires the boot to flex forward to
allow a striding action, so the boots were designed around a sole piece
that allowed forward flexing while still keeping the foot relatively
firm side-to-side. The upper portions, the cuff, was relatively soft,
designed primarily for comfort and warmth. Modern cross-country ski
boots remain almost unchanged since 1950s, although modern materials
have replaced leather and other natural fibres.

With the introduction of ski lifts, the need for skiing to get to the
top of the hill was eliminated, and a much stiffer design was preferred,
providing better control over the ski when sliding downhill. A key
development was the invention in 1928 of the Kandahar cable binding,
which attached the heel solidly to the ski and used a strong spring to
pull the boot forward into the toe iron. The design required a stiffer,
reinforced boot sole, often build on a wooden shank.[3] New boots that
had been boiled in oil or soaked in glue were introduced to stiffen the
upper cuff. These were universally uncomfortable, especially during the
break-in period when they were new. Once broken-in, they wore out
quickly as they continued to soften up. Racers typically had only weeks
to wear a particular pair before it was no longer useful.[4] Another
attempt to stiffen the leg/ski connection was the "long thong", a long
leather strap fixed directly to the ski that was wrapped several times
around the lower leg and then buckled closed. This offered a great
improvement in control, but increased the risk of injury in the event of
an accident.[5]

## Alpine

![](Ski_boots_alpin_large.jpg "Ski_boots_alpin_large.jpg")

Modern alpine ski boots have rigid soles and attach to the ski at both
toe and heel using a spring-loaded binding. The interface between boot
and binding is standardized by [ISO
5355](http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=38623), which
defines the size and shape of the hard plastic flanges on the toe and
heel of the boot. Ski boots are sized using the
[Mondopoint](ISO_9407 "wikilink") system.

### Front-entry

Front-entry (or "top-entry", rarely "overlap" or "Lange") boots have
been the primary boot design for most of the history of downhill skiing.
The design evolved from existing leather boot through several steps.

In 1956, the Swiss factory Henke introduced the buckle boot, using
over-center levered latches patented by Hans Martin to replace laces.[6]
Laces spread the load across a number of eyelets in the leather, whereas
the buckles concentrated the load at only a few points. To spread it
back out again, the boots featured C-shaped flaps that stretched over
the opening where the laces would be, to the side where the buckles were
located. These had the added advantage of also helping block snow from
entering the front of the boot.

Beginning around 1960 [Bob Lange](Lange_(ski_boots) "wikilink")
experimented with ways to replace leather with plastic. Early examples
used a lace-up design, but in 1964 he combined a new, more flexible
[polyurethane](polyurethane "wikilink") plastic with the overlapping
flap and buckle system from Henke to produce the first recognizably
modern ski boot. Production examples appeared in 1966, and when [Nancy
Greene](Nancy_Greene "wikilink") started winning races on them, the
plastic boot became a must-have item. Replacing leather with plastic
dramatically improved stiffness and control, along with durability and
warmth (leather boots had a way of soaking through, which led to wet,
frozen feet).[7] Over time the cuff around the leg evolved upward,
starting just over the ankle like leather boots, but rising to a point
about half way to the knee by the 1980s. Only minor changes have
occurred to this basic design since then.

Almost all modern front-entry boots consist of two sections, one around
the foot, and another around the lower leg. These are joined by
rivets/rotating joints near the ankle that allows the leg to pivot
forward, but not to the sides. This allows excellent control by
transmitting even the smallest lateral movements of the leg to the ski.
However, the rigid cuff also makes them very difficult to put on and
take off. Additionally, because the boot clamps across the foot, pulling
the sides inward, it is difficult to produce a single design that fits a
range of foot shapes and sizes. This leads to shell modification
services, when the boot is stretched to fit the skier's foot, typically
by heating the plastic and pressing it into place. This is also known as
"blowing" ("punching", "pushing"). Sometimes material will be ground off
the boot to provide more room. This is normally used only with
front-entry designs, other designs normally include much more room in
the foot area as they do not clamp down the same way.

![](Salomon_SX92.jpg "Salomon_SX92.jpg")

### Rear-entry

Rear-entry boots were brought to market in the early 1970s by the
[Hanson brothers](Hanson_Industries_(ski_boots) "wikilink") to address
the issue of getting conventional boots on and off, while also providing
a generally better fit.[8] Rear-entry designs were very popular in the
1980s, notably [Salomon](Salomon_Group "wikilink") designs like the
racing-oriented SX 91 Equipe.

In the rear-entry design, the entire foot area and sole are a single
unit similar to a [slipper](slipper "wikilink"). The leg cuff is split
in two, with front and rear sections that meet at the hinge point at the
ankle. The rear half of the cuff can pivot far to the rear, opening wide
for easy entry. Closing a cable locks the moving rear portion forward
onto the front half, forming the stiff cuff that pivots around rivets at
the ankle like a conventional front-entry design. As the toe area is a
single piece and lacks buckles for adjustment, rear-entry boots may have
considerable "slop", and various systems of cables, plates or
foam-filled bladders were used to address this. The upside of this
approach is that the foot area can be made larger, fitting almost any
foot.

The rear entry design fell from popularity in the 1990s due to their
shunning by racers in search of a closer fit. Recent improvements to
front-entry and mid-entry boots, primarily in the areas of comfort and
ease of entry/exit, have diminished the popularity of rear-entry designs
even in recreational roles, though mid-range models remain common as
rental boots.

### Three-piece

Three-piece (or "open-throat") boots were first developed by Mel
Dalebout (around 1969), who introduced a rigid magnesium boot shell in
that year (Brixia did the same thing with their aluminum shell at around
the same time). The big advantage was that the main shell was a single
piece that was convex at all points, meaning it could be easily produced
using a plug mould. Conventional boots with overlapping flaps required
more complex moulding processes. Engineers at Henke, Heierling, Sanmarco
and Caber saw the advantage for high-speed moulding, and plastic
three-piece boots were on the market by 1972, when Roland Collombin won
the Olympic downhill in the Henke Strato.

Boot designer [Sven Coomer](Sven_Coomer "wikilink") later improved the
design with a corrugated tongue, and this technique was commercialized
by Comfort Products, an Aspen, Colo. company owned by the ex-ski racer
Erik Giese. Giese licensed Coomer's concept to the Swiss company
Raichle-Molitor; the company introduced it in 1979 as the
[Flexon](Raichle_Flexon "wikilink"), which became very popular among
downhill racers and mogul skiers.[9] The Flexon was extremely popular
among professional skiers, especially for
[moguls](mogul_skiing "wikilink") and
[freestyle](freestyle_skiing "wikilink"), but a series of business
blunders put Raichle out of business in the late 1990s.[10] Several
companies produce three-piece designs today, often referred to as
"cabrio" boots (after convertible-top cabriolet vehicles[11]), and they
are once again becoming popular models.

The design closely resembles a conventional front-entry design, with
separate foot and leg sections riveted at the ankle. However, the
overlapping flaps of these designs are cut away, leaving a slot-like
opening running down the front of the leg and over the foot. A separate
plastic tongue is positioned over this opening on the front of the boot,
and buckled down to close it. The open cuff (the "throat") makes the
boots easy to get on and off, and the shaping of the tongue allows
complete control over the forward flex. A single shell can be used with
different tongues to provide any needed flex pattern from racing-stiff
to freestyle-soft.

### Hybrid leather

The introduction of plastic boots in the 1960s led a number of companies
to introduce "hybrid" boots with plastic inserts for additional lateral
strength. These were widespread in the late 1960s, especially from the
large collection of Italian bookmakers in Montebelluna, before they
started introducing all-plastic designs of their own. Typical designs
used a plastic insert wrapping around the heel area and extending up to
just below the ankle, allowing the skier to force their foot sideways
and offering some edging control. Others, notably 1968's [Raichle Fibre
Jet](Raichle_Fibre_Jet "wikilink"), wrapped a soft leather boot in an
external fibreglass shell, producing a side-entry design that was not
particularly successful.[12] Hybrid designs often incorporated elements
of the side-entry or three-piece designs. The Fibre Jet shared much in
common with the Rosemount design, for instance.

![](Rosemount_Ski_Boots.jpg "Rosemount_Ski_Boots.jpg")

### Side-entry

Introduced by [Rosemount](Rosemount_Ski_Boots "wikilink") in 1965,
side-entry design consisted of an almost completely enclosed shell with
a cut-out section on one side. The cut-out was covered by a flap that
hinged along the back of the boot, swinging to the rear to open.
Stepping in was very easy, simply sliding the foot sideways in through
the opening, then swinging the flap closed and stretching a fabric cover
over it to seal it. As the upper and lower sections both opened, metal
plates were needed on the sides to connect the two mechanically. A
problem was that the boot did not meet perfectly along the join,
allowing snow to force its way into the boot, although improvements were
continuous. This design fell from use in the 1970s as higher-cuff
front-entry boots became largely universal.[13]

### External frames

The ski boot provides four functions; protecting the foot from the
elements, providing a mounting point for the binding, and transmitting
forces between the leg and the ski. In theory, there's no reason these
have to be combined in a single unit, and several designs have split
these functions up. One example is the [Nava
System](Nava_System "wikilink") from the 1980s, which used a soft boot
that clipped into custom bindings, and an arm that extended up from the
rear binding to wrap around the leg and provide lateral control.[14]

### Knee-highs

In 1980 four designs were introduced that all rose to a point just under
the knee. They were normal ski boots below, but used an extended tongue
that fastened around the upper leg using a variety of methods. They
offered much greater edging control, and were quickly copied by many
other companies. They all disappeared by 1983, a victim largely of
fashion - ski pants wouldn't fit over them. None are produced today.[15]

## Nordic

![](Old-sns-side.jpg "Old-sns-side.jpg")

### Cross-country and telemark

Cross-country boots, like all Nordic equipment, attach to the ski
usually only at the toe of the boot and are allowed to flex at the ball
of the foot similarly to a normal shoe or boot. Cross-country boots
generally use one of four attachment systems; NNN (New Nordic Norm),
75mm Nordic Norm ("three-pin" binding, "75NN"), d-ring, or SNS (Salomon
Nordic System). A four-pin binding system similar to 75NN used to be
popular in the USSR. A new Salomon Pilot binding is now widely used for
racing because it uses two connection points so that the skier has more
stability and control over the ski. As these boots are intended for
travel over generally flat terrain, they are optimized for light weight
and efficiency of motion.[16]

Telemark refers to a specific technique for making downhill turns on
Nordic equipment. This has resulted in highly specialized equipment
designed for better performance in a downhill setting. Until 1992
Telemark boots were basically heavy leather boots with the front of the
sole adapted to the 75mm Nordic Norm. The introduction of the New
Telemark Norm (NTN) binding in 2007 change the technique
dramatically.[17] Since then plastic boots have become more and more
common and now make up almost all Telemark boots. Plastic allows for a
laterally stiffer boot while still allowing freedom of flex at the ball
of the foot through the use of bellows. Boots intended for more cross
country travel generally have a lower cuff, softer flex and lighter
weight. Boots specialized for downhill use have higher cuffs, stiffer
flex and heavier weight. Telemark boots are almost always equipped with
a rubber sole.

### Alpine touring

![](Tourenschuhe01_kl.jpg "Tourenschuhe01_kl.jpg")

Although randonnée is considered as an alpine sport, it basically
combines the cross-country stride for uphill portions and then
conventional alpine techniques on the downhill. The equipment uses most
closely compares to modern telemark systems, with a stiff plastic boot
offering good downhill control, and a binding system that allows it to
pivot at the toe for cross-country striding.[18] Different models trade
off light weight against downhill performance. They have a rockered,
rubber sole to allow for easier walking. This means that they will not
fit in ordinary alpine bindings. Instead, the interface between alpine
touring boots and bindings is defined by [ISO
9523](http://www.iso.org/iso/pressrelease.htm?refid=Ref1194). Other
attachment methods exist and prominent amongst these are the *Tech*
bindings and fittings that were first commercialized by Dynafit as the
TLT. As yet, these are not covered by an international standard.

## Snowboarding

![](Snowboard-Negative0-18-16A(1).jpg "fig:Snowboard-Negative0-18-16A(1).jpg")
gear consists of an L-shaped plastic frame for the bindings, and
semi-stiff boots on the feet. Ratcheting buckles hold the boots in the
frame. These are generally far more comfortable than typical alpine
boots.\]\] Downhill techniques, alpine, telemark and snowboarding, all
perform turns by rotating the ski or board onto its edge. Once on edge,
the curved pattern cut into the side (the "sidecut") causes the ski or
board to bend into a curve. As they move forward over the snow, this
curved shape causes them to turn.

[Snowboard](Snowboard "wikilink") boots and bindings are normally far
simpler than their downhill counterparts, rarely including release
systems for instance, and need to provide mechanical support only in the
fore and aft directions. These typically consist of an external frame,
generally L shaped, which the snowboarder steps into and then fastens
down using straps over the boot. The boot itself is not as responsible
for transmitting forces, and can be much softer than a typical downhill
boot. When the sport was first introduced, normal winter boots were
used, but today it is much more common to use semi-stiff snowboarding
boots. Some specialty disciplines use harder boots with step-in bindings
more similar to downhill systems, but these are not widely used outside
these fields, even though some downhill sports teachers use these so
they can switch between snowboarding or skiing classes without having to
change boots.

## See also

-   [Ski binding](Ski_binding "wikilink")

## References

## External links

[Ski_boots](Category:Ski_boots "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Sports
footwear](Category:Sports_footwear "wikilink")
[Boot](Category:Skiing_equipment "wikilink")

[1]

[2] Wolfgang Lert, ["A Binding
Revolution"](https://books.google.com/books?id=wlgEAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA25),
*Ski Heritage Journal*, March 2002, pp. 25-26

[3] Seth Masia, ["A Short, Colorful History of Ski
Boots"](https://skiinghistory.org/news/short-colorful-history-ski-boots),
*Skiing History* magazine, Sept/Oct 2016

[4] John Fry, ["The Story of Modern
Skiing"](https://books.google.com/books?id=FOhrjSuy6rsC&pg=PA81), UPNE,
2006, pp. 81-86

[5] Greg Morrill, ["Long thong required a unique
technique"](http://www.stowetoday.com/stowe_reporter/columnist/article_7f0d1370-3aa6-11e0-8afd-001cc4c002e0.html),
*Stowe Reporter*, 17 February 2011

[6]

[7]

[8] Seth Masia, ["The Rear-Entry Boot: A Life Cut
Short"](https://books.google.com/books?id=RlgEAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA40), Skiing
Heritage Journal, June 2007, pp. 40-42

[9]

[10] Seth Morrison, ["Morrison Hotel: Boots Made for
Stalking"](http://espn.go.com/action/freeskiing/news/story?id=4589945),
ESPN, 3 November 2009

[11] [Cabriolet (carriage)](Cabriolet_(carriage) "wikilink")

[12] Greg Morrill, ["Raichle Fiber
Jets"](http://retro-skiing.com/2011/01/raichle-fiber-jets/#comment-3021),
20 January 2011

[13] Paul Stewart, ["A Revolutionary New Ski Boot Has a Streamlined
Shell of Rigid Fiber
Glass"](http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/vault/article/magazine/MAG1077886/index.htm),
*Sports Illustrated*, 15 November 1965

[14] Clint Swett, ["Have Your Ski Boots Got You Sore? A Comforting
Change Is Now
Afoot"](http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/vault/article/magazine/MAG1065468/index.htm),
*Sports Illustrated*, 17 November 1986

[15] Seth Masia, ["The Rise and Fall of the Knee-High
Boot"](https://books.google.com/books?id=-JLvKdmbA1AC&pg=PA17), *Skiing
Heritage Journal*, June 2003

[16] Barbara Brewster, ["Gear Up Properly for
Cross-Country"](https://books.google.com/books?id=gPORdmXapkEC&pg=PA72),
*Snow Country*, January 1989, pp. 72-75

[17] ["NTN On-snow Test
Report"](http://www.telemarktips.com/TeleNews87.html), *Telemark News*,
26 January 2007

[18] Ronald Eng, ["Mountaineering: Freedom of the
Hills"](https://books.google.com/books?id=QupdBAEgpGEC&pg=PA329), The
Mountaineers Books, 2010, p. 329