<figure>
<img src="White_stiletto_high-heels.jpg" title="White_stiletto_high-heels.jpg" width="300" alt="White_stiletto_high-heels.jpg" /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">White_stiletto_high-heels.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

A **stiletto heel** is a long, thin, [high heel](high_heel "wikilink")
found on some [boots](boot "wikilink") and [shoes](shoe "wikilink").

It is named after the [stiletto](stiletto "wikilink") dagger, the phrase
being first recorded in the early 1930s.[1] Stiletto heels may vary in
length from 2.5 centimetres (1 inch) to 25 cm (10 inches) or more if a
platform sole is used, and are sometimes defined as having a diameter at
the ground of less than 1 cm (slightly less than half an inch).
Stiletto-style heels or shorter are called [kitten
heels](kitten_heel "wikilink").

Not all high slim heels merit the description stiletto. The extremely
slender original Italian-style stiletto heels of the late 1950s and very
early 1960s were no more than in diameter for much of their length,
although the heel sometimes flared out a little at the top-piece (tip).
After their demise in the mid-late 1960s, such slender heels were
difficult to find until recently due to changes in the way heels were
mass-produced.

## History

<figure>
<img src="Stiefelwiki1e.jpg" title="Stiefelwiki1e.jpg" width="190" alt="Stiefelwiki1e.jpg" /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">Stiefelwiki1e.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

Relatively thin high heels were certainly around in the late 19th
century, as numerous [fetish drawings](fetish_art "wikilink") attest.
Firm photographic evidence exists in the form of photographs of Parisian
singer [Mistinguett](Mistinguett "wikilink") from the 1940s. These shoes
were designed by [Andre Perugia](Andre_Perugia "wikilink"), who began
designing shoes in 1906. It seems unlikely that he invented the
stiletto, but he is probably the first firmly-documented designer of the
high, slim heel. The word stiletto applied to a heel is derived from a
[knife](knife "wikilink") or [dagger](dagger "wikilink")
[stiletto](stiletto "wikilink"), which is a long, thin blade, to which
the heel of the shoe is similar in profile. Its usage in footwear first
appeared in print in the *[New Statesman](New_Statesman "wikilink")*
magazine in 1959: "She came ...forward, her walk made lopsided by the
absence of one heel of the stilettos".[2]

High-heel shoes were worn by men and women
[courtiers](courtier "wikilink"). The stiletto heel came with the advent
of technology using a supporting metal shaft or stem embedded into the
heel, instead of wood or other, weaker materials that required a wide
heel. This revival of the opulent heel style can be attributed to the
designer [Roger Vivier](Roger_Vivier "wikilink") and such designs became
very popular in the 1950s.[3]

As time went on, stiletto heels would become known more for their erotic
nature than for their ability to make height. Stiletto heels are a
common [fetish](Sexual_fetishism "wikilink") item. As a fashion item,
their popularity has changed over time. After an initial wave of
popularity in the 1950s, they reached their most refined shape in the
early 1960s, when the toes of the shoes which bore them became as
slender and elongated as the stiletto heels themselves. As a result of
the overall sharpness of outline, it was customary for women to refer to
the whole shoe as a "stiletto", not just the heel, via
[synecdoche](synecdoche "wikilink") (*[pars pro
toto](pars_pro_toto "wikilink")*). Although they faded from the scene
after the [Beatle](The_Beatles "wikilink") era began, their popularity
continued at street level, and women stubbornly refused to give them up
even after they could no longer readily find them in the mainstream
shops. A version of the stiletto heel was reintroduced in 1974 by
[Manolo Blahnik](Manolo_Blahnik "wikilink"), who dubbed his "new" heel
the "Needle". Similar heels were stocked at the big
[Biba](Biba "wikilink") store in London, by [Russell &
Bromley](Russell_&_Bromley "wikilink") and by smaller boutiques. Old,
unsold stocks of pointed-toe stilettos and contemporary efforts to
replicate them (lacking the true stiletto heel because of changes in the
way heels were by then being mass-produced) were sold in street fashion
markets and became popular with [punks](Punk_subculture "wikilink") and
with other fashion "tribes" of the late 1970s until supplies of the
inspirational original styles dwindled in the early 1980s. Subsequently,
round-toe shoes with slightly thicker (sometimes cone-shaped)
semi-stiletto heels, often very high in an attempt to convey slenderness
were frequently worn at the office with wide-shouldered [power
suits](Suit_(clothing) "wikilink"). The style survived through much of
the 1980s but almost completely disappeared during the 1990s, when
professional and college-age women took to wearing shoes with thick,
block heels. The slender stiletto heel staged a major comeback after
2000 when young women adopted the style for dressing up office wear or
adding a feminine touch to casual wear, like jeans.

Stiletto heels are particularly associated with the image of the *[femme
fatale](femme_fatale "wikilink")*. They are often considered to be a
seductive item of clothing, and often feature in popular culture in this
context.

## Image

Stilettos, like all similar [high-heeled
shoes](high-heeled_shoe "wikilink"), give the optical illusion of a
longer, slimmer leg, a smaller foot, and overall greater height. They
alter the wearer's posture and gait,[4] flexing the calf muscles and
making the bust and buttocks more prominent.[5]

## Disadvantages

All high heels counter the natural functionality of the foot, sometimes
causing skeletal and muscular problems if users wear them excessively;
such shoes are a common cause of [venous](venous "wikilink") complaints
such as pain, fatigue, and heavy-feeling legs, and have been found to
provoke [venous hypertension](venous_hypertension "wikilink") in the
lower limbs.[6] Despite their impracticality and fluctuating demand,
they persist as a fashion option.

Stiletto heels concentrate a large amount of force into a small area.
The great pressure under such a heel, which is greater than that under
the feet of an elephant,[7] can cause damage to carpets and floors. The
stiletto heel, unless equipped with a "heel stopper" to enlarge the
floor contact area, can be impractical for outdoor wear on soft ground
(such as grass, sand or mud), or in environments where floor damage is
unacceptable (Lino/soft wood floors in a household or on aircraft).

## References

## Bibliography

-

[Category:High-heeled
footwear](Category:High-heeled_footwear "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]