![](Sonnet_Charlotte.JPG "fig:Sonnet_Charlotte.JPG") (known as Sonnet in
the United States)\]\]

A **T-bar sandal** or T-bar shoe (also known in the [United
Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink") as "school sandal" or "closed-toe
sandal") is a closed, low-cut shoe with two or more straps forming one
or more T shapes (one or more straps across the instep passing through a
perpendicular, central strap that extends from the vamp).

Classic T-bars for children are typically made of blue or brown
[leather](leather "wikilink"), have two thin straps forming a single T
shape and fastened with a buckle, a broad and rounded
[toebox](toebox "wikilink") pierced with a pattern of holes, a low heel,
and a crêpe rubber outsole stitched-down to the upper. Among boys,
T-bars are traditionally worn with socks (though it is possible without
them as well), short trousers and a shirt.

## History

First seen in Europe and America in the early 1900s, T-bars became very
common among children in the 1950s,[1] particularly among boys where
they supplanted pre-war [Mary Janes](Mary_Jane_(shoe) "wikilink"). T-bar
wearing declined after the 1960s nonetheless, following the cultural and
clothing revolution that swept the West.

Today, T-bars for children, particularly the more classic styles, are
often considered semi-formal shoes, appropriate for school (some primary
schools in the United Kingdom require that pupils wear them with their
[uniform](school_uniform "wikilink")[2]). They may also be viewed as
formal shoes for boys, suitable for religious ceremonies, weddings,
visits, and birthday parties for example. More modern styles are also
worn in casual settings, however: playgrounds, shopping centres, etc.
Although less popular than in the past, T-bars remain a timeless classic
of children's fashion and, for many people, a symbol of childhood.

## Gallery

<center>

<File:Lido>, Grand Hotel des Bains. Fortepan 4365.jpg\|Two boys wearing
twin-strap T-bar sandals in [Venice](Venice "wikilink"), Italy. in 1907.
<File:D1422> B76292 C08 (8595111416).jpg\|Studio photograph of a
seven-year-old boy wearing T-bar sandals in
[Strabane](Strabane "wikilink"), Northern Ireland, 1915. <File:Fotothek>
df roe-neg 0006209 026 Porträt eines Jungen mit Zuckertüte.jpg\|A
schoolboy with a *[Schultüte](Schultüte "wikilink")* and wearing T-bar
sandals in [Leipzig](Leipzig "wikilink"), East Germany, 1951.
<File:Telyn> Gothic newydd i Christine Lee, 9 oed, o Ros-y-bol
(8517453105).jpg\|A girl harpist wearing twin-strap T-bar sandals in
Wales, 1960. <File:NW>, MW & ADW in 1964.jpg\|Studio photograph of boys
wearing T-bar sandals in [Colombo](Colombo "wikilink"), Sri Lanka, 1964.
<File:Brownie> and Girl Guide Uniforms Canada circa 1975
(8202402537).jpg\|A [Girl Guide](Girl_Guide "wikilink") and a
[Brownie](Brownies_(Scouting) "wikilink") wearing T-bar sandals in
Canada, about 1975. <File:Hunting-MacGregor.jpg%7CA> four-year-old boy
wearing a kilt and T-bar sandals in Scotland, 1987.

</center>

## References

[Category:Children's clothing](Category:Children's_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Sandals](Category:Sandals "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink")

[1]

[2]