**Tiger-head shoes** () are an example of traditional [Chinese folk
handicraft](Chinese_folk_art "wikilink") used as footwear for children.
Their name comes from the toe cap, which looks like the head of a tiger.
In the North of China, people also call them **cat-head shoes**. In
Chinese culture, tigers are regarded as auspicious; people embroider the
head and the upper of the shoes with tiger or tiger-head patterns, in
the hope that their children will become as robust and dynamic as
tigers. Also, the vivid image of tiger-head pattern was thought to expel
evil spirits to protect their children from diseases and disasters. It
is a complicated work to make tiger-head shoes, there are many delicate
stitch work such as embroidery, or weaving simply on the head of the
shoes. The [vamp](Shoe#Parts "wikilink") (upper part of the shoe) is
mainly colored in red and yellow, and residents usually use thick lines
to draw the outline of the mouth, eyebrow, nose and the eyes of the
tiger to express its power in an exaggerated way.[1][2]

## Legends

The origins of tiger-head shoes are unknown, but there are several folk
legends about them. Tiger-head shoes are marked by the practice of
[exorcising](exorcising "wikilink") evil spirits.[3] The following is
one of the legends:

Long long ago, there was a lady who has clever hands and good sense. She
was very gifted in embroidery, so that her child was always well
dressed. One night, a monster came to the village and caught all the
children there except her son. From then people began to realize that
the shoes the child wearing were decorated with a tiger’s head at the
front which scared the monster, thus leaving the child safe. Therefore,
people began to imitate this practice.[4]

## Region distribution

Tiger-head shoes are popular in North China, especially in
[Hebei](Hebei "wikilink"), [Henan](Henan "wikilink"),
[Shanxi](Shanxi "wikilink"), [Shandong](Shandong "wikilink"),
[Shanxi](Shanxi "wikilink") provinces. Different areas have formed
different ways of making tiger-head shoes. In the southern part of Hebei
province, the embroidery type is most well-known.[5][6][7][8]

## Culture

In Chinese culture, the tiger is seen as sturdy and mighty with the
title of “king of the beasts”. Thus, when it is mentioned, people will
naturally feel a sense of power and fright. As a result, the expressions
concerning tiger, such as the tiger's roar (Chinese: 虎啸, Pinyin:
huxiao), its frightful appearance (Chinese: 虎威, Pinyin: huwei), and
the phrase "vigorous as a tiger" (Chinese: 虎虎有生气, Pinyin:
huhuyoushengqi) came into being, along with worship of the creature.

When a child is growing up, he would come across a series of accidents
or even calamities caused by nature or society. These accidents and
calamities need to be conquered, so that the child can grow up
healthily. Therefore, he is expected to become burly, dignified, and
vigorous like a tiger, and possess all the inner qualities of a tiger as
well. One major embodiment of this hope is to embroider the patterns of
a tiger's heads on shoe toes and uppers.[9]

In other words, tiger or tiger-head patterns are used to exorcise evil
spirits and accelerate the "tigerous temperament" of a child.

## References

## External links

-   [Images](http://baike.baidu.com/albums/70493/70493/1/1986929.html#1986929$)
-   [Images of production
    steps](http://www.rouding.com/chuantongshougong/minjianyishu/30575.htm)
-   [Video showing
    production](http://www.rouding.com/chuantongshougong/minjianyishu/30577.htm)

[Category:Chinese folk art](Category:Chinese_folk_art "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]