**Toms** (stylized as **TOMS**) is a
[for-profit](for-profit "wikilink")[1][2]

</ref>

[3] company based in [Playa Del
Rey](Playa_Del_Rey,_California "wikilink"),
[California](California "wikilink").[4] Founded in 2006 by [Blake
Mycoskie](Blake_Mycoskie "wikilink"), an
[entrepreneur](entrepreneur "wikilink") from
[Arlington](Arlington,_Texas "wikilink"),
[Texas](Texas "wikilink").[5][6][7] the company designs and markets
shoes — as well as eyewear, coffee, apparel, and handbags.

## Company history

Blake Mycoskie visited [Argentina](Argentina "wikilink") in 2002 while
competing in the [second season](The_Amazing_Race_2 "wikilink") of *[The
Amazing Race](The_Amazing_Race "wikilink")* with his sister.[8] He
returned on vacation in January 2006, and met a woman who was
volunteering to deliver shoes to children. Mycoskie offered to help and
has cited the shoe distribution experience, and the many shoeless
children he encountered, as the birth of his idea for his eventual
company.[9]

He decided to develop a type of alpargata (a simple canvas slip-on shoe
that is popular in Argentina)[10] for the North American market, with
the goal of providing a new pair of free shoes to youth of Argentina and
other developing nations for every pair sold.[11] According to Mycoskie,
[Bill Gates](Bill_Gates "wikilink") encouraged him by saying that the
lack of shoes was a major contributor to diseases in children.[12]

Upon returning to the U.S., Mycoskie sold his online [driver
education](driver_education "wikilink") company he was running for
$500,000 to finance Toms shoes.[13]

The company name is derived from the word "tomorrow,"[14] and evolved
from the original concept, "Shoes for Tomorrow Project."[15] Mycoskie
initially commissioned Argentine shoe manufacturers to make 250 pairs of
shoes. Sales officially began in May 2006.[16] After an article ran in
the *[Los Angeles Times](Los_Angeles_Times "wikilink")*, the company
received order requests for nine times the available stock online,[17]
and 10,000 pairs were sold in the first year. The first batch of 10,000
free shoes were distributed in October 2006 to Argentine
children.[18][19][20][21]

In 2007, the company launched its first annual "One Day Without Shoes"
event, which encouraged participants to go shoeless for one day in order
to raise awareness about the impact shoes can have on a child's life.
The event has had corporate sponsors such as [AOL](AOL "wikilink"),
[Flickr](Flickr "wikilink"), and the [Discovery
Channel](Discovery_Channel "wikilink").[22]

In October 2007, Toms Shoes received the People's Design Award, as
determined by an online popularity contest by the [Cooper-Hewitt,
National Design
Museum](Cooper-Hewitt,_National_Design_Museum "wikilink")[23]
![](One_Day_Without_Shoes.jpg "fig:One_Day_Without_Shoes.jpg")

By 2011, over 500 retailers carried the brand globally and in the same
year, Toms launched its eyewear line.[24] By 2012 over two million pairs
of new shoes had been given to children in developing countries around
the world. The [Daniels Fund Ethics Initiative](Daniels_Fund "wikilink")
at the [University of New Mexico](University_of_New_Mexico "wikilink")
has described the company as an example of [social
entrepreneurship](social_entrepreneurship "wikilink").[25][26]

The company launched TOMS Roasting Co. in 2014, and with each purchase
of TOMS Roasting Co. [coffee](coffee "wikilink"), the company works with
other organizations to provide 140 liters of safe water (equal to a one
week supply) to a family in need that lives in a coffee-producing
region.[27] In 2015, TOMS Bag Collection was launched to help contribute
to advancements in maternal health. Purchases of TOMS Bags help provide
training for skilled birth attendants and distribute birth kits
containing items that help women practice safe childbirth.[28][29]

In June 2014, the company announced that Mycoskie was looking to sell
part of his stake in the company to help it grow faster and meet its
long-term goals.[30] On August 20, 2014 [Bain
Capital](Bain_Capital "wikilink") acquired 50% of Toms.
[Reuters](Reuters "wikilink") reported that the transaction valued the
company at $625 million; Mycoskie's personal wealth following the deal
was reported at $300 million.[31] Mycoskie retained 50% ownership of
Toms, as well as his role as "Chief Shoe Giver". Mycoskie said he would
use half of the proceeds from the sale to start a new fund to support
socially minded entrepreneurship, and Bain would match his investment
and continue the company's one-for-one policy.[32][33]

## Business Model

### "One for one"

Toms' business model is known as the "one for all concept" model, which
is referring to the company's promise to deliver a pair of free shoes to
a child in need for every sale of their [retail](retail "wikilink")
product.[34] The countries involved have included Argentina, Ethiopia,
Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, Rwanda, South Africa and the United
States.[35] The business has grown beyond producing shoes and has
included eyewear and apparel in Toms product lines. The company uses
[word-of-mouth](word-of-mouth "wikilink") advocacy for much of its
sales, centering its business focus on corporate [social
responsibility](social_responsibility "wikilink"). Part of this model
originally involved a non-profit arm called "Friends of Toms" that
recruited volunteers to help in the shoe distributions in foreign
countries.[36] Toms trademarked the phrase "One for One" to describe its
own business model.[37] Toms has received criticism from the
[international development](international_development "wikilink")
community[38][39] who have stated that Toms' model is designed to make
consumers feel good rather than addressing the underlying causes of
[poverty](poverty "wikilink").[40] Criticisms have also included whether
or not the shoe donation is as effective as a monetary donation to other
charities.[41] Toms responded to this criticism by moving 40% of its
supply chain for shoe donation to countries they actively give in. Toms
presently manufactures shoes in Kenya, India, Ethiopia and Haiti.[42]

A 2014 paper in the *Journal of Development Effectiveness* studied the
effect of Toms Shoes on local shoe markets, and did not find any
statistically significant effect, although analysts and the paper's
authors noted the study was limited in scope and time-scale.[43][44][45]

### Focuses for Corporate Responsibility

Author [Daniel H. Pink](Daniel_H._Pink "wikilink") described the
company's business model as "expressly built for purpose maximization,"
whereby Toms is selling both shoes and its ideal. Toms' consumer market
are purchasing shoes and also making a purchase that transforms them
into benefactors for the company.[46] Another phrase used to try to
describe the business model has been "caring capitalism".[47] Part of
how Toms has developed this description is by incorporating the giving
into its business model before it made a profit, making it as integral
to the business model as its revenue generating aspects.[48] Business
tycoon and [Virgin Group](Virgin_Group "wikilink") founder [Richard
Branson](Richard_Branson "wikilink") wrote of the company's business
model in his book *Screw Business as Usual*, "They look for communities
that will benefit most from Toms based on their economic, health and
education needs while taking into account local business so as not to
create a correlating negative effect." He also commented on Toms'
expansion into eyewear in order to help the nearly 300 million people
who are visually impaired in developing nations.[49]

The company's shoe distribution partners have focused on distributing
shoes in areas where health and social benefits of the shoes would be
the highest. For example, in Ethiopia the shoes are intended to help
prevent a soil-borne disease that attacks the lymphatic system and which
largely affected women and children.[50] Toms sunglasses are sold with
the One for One model, however it does not necessarily provide glasses
only to those in developing countries. The One for One model includes
putting money toward medical treatment, eye surgeries and prescription
glasses. Toms works with the [Seva
Foundation](Seva_Foundation "wikilink") among other partners to
accomplish this.[51] The first countries that Toms implemented its
program were [Nepal](Nepal "wikilink"), [Cambodia](Cambodia "wikilink")
and [Tibet](Tibet "wikilink").[52] The original three designs, according
to Leigh Grogan, were "The stripe on the temples represents the buyer;
the stripe on the tips represents the person whose sight is being
helped, and the middle stripe represents Toms, which brings the two
together."[53][54]

## Shoe Distribution

Shoes have been given to children in 70 countries worldwide, including
the United States, Argentina, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Swaziland, Guatemala,
Haiti and South Africa.[55] Toms are sold at more than 500 stores
nationwide and internationally, including [Neiman
Marcus](Neiman_Marcus "wikilink"), [Nordstrom](Nordstrom "wikilink"),
and [Whole Foods Market](Whole_Foods_Market "wikilink"), which include
shoes made from recycled materials.[56]

A story by *[LA Weekly](LA_Weekly "wikilink")* priced the manufacturing
cost of a pair of Toms Shoes at $3.50-$5.00 in U.S. dollars, and noted
that the children's shoes given out by the company were among the
cheapest to make, which is not necessarily apparent to consumers.
According to garment-industry author Kelsey Timmerman, many people he
spoke to in [Ethiopia](Ethiopia "wikilink") were critical of the
company, saying that they felt it exploited the idea of Ethiopian
poverty as a marketing tool. An Argentina-based shoemaker agreed, saying
that the imagery used by the company was manipulative.[57]

Employees of Toms travel to different countries on "Giving Trips" to
deliver shoes to children in person. In 2006, Toms distributed 10,000
pairs of shoes in Argentina.[58][59] In November 2007, the company
distributed 50,000 pairs of shoes to children in [South
Africa](South_Africa "wikilink").[60] As of April 2009, Toms had
distributed 140,000 pairs of shoes to children in Argentina, Ethiopia,
South Africa as well as children in the United States.[61] As of 2012,
Toms has given away over one million pairs of shoes in 40
countries.[62][63]

### Campus Clubs

Students attending colleges across the United States have created TOMS
campus clubs. As of March 20, 2014, 281 campus clubs existed in the
United States with another dozen located in Canada.[64] By comparison,
another nonprofit organization known as Lions Club International was
established in 1917 and is known for working to ending the cause of
blindness, reports 400 Lions’ campus clubs in 42 countries.[65]

## Philanthropy

### Partnerships

In 2009 Toms partnered with the [Charlize
Theron](Charlize_Theron "wikilink") Africa Outreach Project to create
limited edition shoes, and used profits to benefit education and medical
support in remote areas of Africa suffering from AIDS outbreaks.[66]
Toms has also produced shoes with a handlebar mustache symbol in place
of the traditional Toms symbol in support of the [Movember
Foundation](Movember "wikilink").[67] Toms is a supporter of the charity
[charity: water](charity:_water "wikilink"), with which it has partnered
with for several years, including its WaterForward project, which aims
to bring clean water to underdeveloped countries.[68] An additional
partner charity is FEED, a charity where a consumer will purchase a pair
of shoes and the company will donate twelve meals to impoverished
schools in addition to a pair of shoes for impoverished children.[69]

The major mission of Toms is that a business, rather than a charity,
would help their impact last longer. In his speech at the Second Annual
[Clinton Global Initiative](Clinton_Global_Initiative "wikilink")[70]
Mycoskie states that his initial motivation was a disease called
[podoconiosis](podoconiosis "wikilink")—a debilitating and disfiguring
disease which causes one's feet to swell along with many other health
implications. Also known as "Mossy Foot",
[podoconiosis](podoconiosis "wikilink") is a form of elephantiasis that
affects the [lymphatic system](lymphatic_system "wikilink") of the lower
legs. The disease is a soil-transmitted disease caused by walking in
[silica](silica "wikilink")-rich soil.[71] Toms currently works with
factories nearby where they perform some of their shoe drops.[72]

### Influence

The Tom's '[One for One](Social_entrepreneurship "wikilink")' model has
inspired many different companies to adopt similar concepts. [Warby
Parker](Warby_Parker "wikilink"), launched in 2010, donates a pair of
glasses to someone in need for every pair of glasses it sells. The
social business Ruby Cup uses a 'Buy One Give One' model for their
menstrual cup venture, benefiting women in
[Kenya](Kenya "wikilink").[73] A Bristol
[chiropractic](chiropractic "wikilink") center influenced by Mycoskie's
*Start Something That Matters*[74] book started donating £1 to Cherish
Uganda for every appointment attended.[75] [citizenAID North
America](http://www.citizenaid.us) launched in 2018, donates life-saving
training to US teachers and educators.

### Focus on the Family

In July 2011, Toms founder Blake Mycoskie participated in an event
sponsored by the group [Focus on the
Family](Focus_on_the_Family "wikilink").[76][77] After being criticized
for supporting a [socially conservative](social_conservatism "wikilink")
non-profit, Mycoskie posted an apology on his website stating that he
and his handlers had not heard of Focus on the Family before
participating in the event and decided it was a mistake. He also stated
that he and the company support equal human and civil rights.[78][79]

## References

## External links

-   [US official website](http://www.toms.com/)

[Category:Social responsibility
organizations](Category:Social_responsibility_organizations "wikilink")
[Category:Organizations established in
2006](Category:Organizations_established_in_2006 "wikilink")
[Category:2010s fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Shoe companies of the United
States](Category:Shoe_companies_of_the_United_States "wikilink")
[Category:Shoe brands](Category:Shoe_brands "wikilink") [Category:Social
enterprises](Category:Social_enterprises "wikilink") [Category:Companies
based in Santa Monica,
California](Category:Companies_based_in_Santa_Monica,_California "wikilink")
[Category:2006 establishments in
California](Category:2006_establishments_in_California "wikilink")

[1] businessoffashion.com [Blake Mycoskie on 10 Years of
Toms](http://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/news-analysis/blake-mycoskie-on-10-years-of-toms)
MAY 6, 2016

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39] [1](https://web.archive.org/web/20131217044106/http://www.peacecorpsconnect.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/ComeToAfricaForBusinessNotHandouts_WV.pdf)

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71] Sharaby, Orli. ["Toms Shoes' Blake Mycoskie Talks to
PSFK"](http://www.psfk.com/2009/03/toms-shoes-blake-mycoskie-talks-to-psfk.html).
Syfy. March 9, 2009.

[72]

[73]

[74] [amazon.com](amazon.com "wikilink") [Start Something That
Matters](https://www.amazon.com/Start-Something-Matters-Blake-Mycoskie/dp/0812981448)

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]