![](TrackSpikeInstalled.jpg "TrackSpikeInstalled.jpg")

**Track spikes**, or just **spikes**, are racing shoes used by athletes
when racing on the track. Some spikes are designed for longer-term
training on tracks, but generally the shoes are used for racing. The
term "spikes" can also refer to track shoes featuring such protrusions,
though these are technically called **pins**. Spikes are similar to
studs, which are used for team sports, although generally smaller and
with a sharp point.

## History

![](Harold_Abrahams_1921.jpg "fig:Harold_Abrahams_1921.jpg") wearing
J.W. Fosters pioneering running spikes.\]\]
![](Old_running_spikes_side_view.jpg "fig:Old_running_spikes_side_view.jpg")
Track spikes had become popular in England by the 1860s,[1] but the
concept of spikes in shoes to give running traction has been around much
longer. As written in the 1852 publication of *Calmet's Dictionary of
the Holy Bible* regarding military arms at the time of [Paul the
Apostle](Paul_the_Apostle "wikilink") (c. 5 – c. 67):

For pioneering the use of spikes, [J.W. Foster and
Sons](J.W._Foster_and_Sons "wikilink")'s revolutionary running pumps
appear in the book, *Golden Kicks: The Shoes that changed Sport*.[2] The
company began distributing shoes across the United Kingdom and were worn
by British athletes.[3] They were made famous by 100m Olympic champion
[Harold Abrahams](Harold_Abrahams "wikilink") (who would be immortalized
in the Oscar winning film *[Chariots of
Fire](Chariots_of_Fire "wikilink")*) in the [1924 Summer
Olympics](1924_Summer_Olympics "wikilink") held in
[Paris](Paris "wikilink").[4][5]

In 1934, [American football](American_football "wikilink") player and
coach [Pop Warner](Glenn_Scobey_Warner "wikilink") recommended them for
running events in his widely distributed book, *"Pop" Warner's book for
boys.*[6]

Additionally, Adolf Dassler, the founder of Adidas, assisted in the
development of track spikes for multiple events. In an effort to enhance
the quality of spiked athletic footwear, he transitioned from a previous
model of heavy metal spikes to attempting to utilize canvas and rubber.
He carved them by hand and were eventually worn during the 1936 Olympics
by Jesse Owens. People began to take notice, and Owens inherently helped
popularize Dassler's design. Track spikes continued to gain notable
recognition when Emil Zatopek, a distance runner from Czech Republic,
wore them during the 1952 Olympics in Helesinki.[7]

## Design

![](SpikePlate.jpg "fig:SpikePlate.jpg") The front of the sole features
a rigid or semi-rigid spike plate containing between 3 and 9 threaded
holes called spike wells. Spikes can be screwed into each well using a
spike [wrench](wrench "wikilink"). Recently, some individuals have
attempted to add a "through hole" at the bottom of the spike to make
them easier to tighten, remove, and install. [8]

Some shoes have permanent or "fixed" spikes which are not meant to be
removed. Spikes may break during competition.

Track shoes are exceptionally light, some shoes weighing less than five
ounces (142 grams) each, half the weight of many standard running shoes.

In most track shoes, the toe region bends up to allow space for
protruding spikes and to encourage athletes to run on their toes. This
upward angle, known as "taper," varies widely depending on the intended
use of the shoe, and the taper angle can be rigid or flexible. Shoes
with a large taper are said to be "aggressive."

This shoe design may cause harm to the athlete if worn for extended
periods of time outside of competition. Injury may occur when walking in
a leisurely fashion, as the athlete is not on his or her toes, which is
the manner in which the shoes were meant to be worn. [9]

## Types of shoes

![](Nieuwespikes2.jpg "fig:Nieuwespikes2.jpg") Air Zoom Distance\]\]
There is considerable variation among track shoes depending on their
intended use within the sport of [track and
field](track_and_field "wikilink").

[Sprint](Sprint_(running) "wikilink") spikes generally have a very stiff
spike plate with the greatest number of spike wells. The taper is
highest and most rigid in sprint spikes, maximizing the efficiency of
energy transfer with each stride. Very little heel support is needed
because sprinters spend most or all of their time on their toes. Sprint
spikes may have a zip-up cover instead of or in addition to laces to
improve aerodynamics. Sprint spikes should fit tightly but they should
not be too tight to the point that the runners toes are cramping and
they should not be too loose that will result in the runner losing power
and speed. They should fit tighter than regular athletic shoes yet still
comfortable enough to perform in.

[Distance](Distance_running "wikilink") shoes have a more flexible spike
plate with less taper and fewer spikes. Because of the longer race
distances, support through the mid-foot and heel is as important as
efficiency with distance spikes. This means that distance spikes
generally have a softer, more durable sole, particularly through the
heel region. Although still "glove-like," the fit for distance spikes is
generally slightly looser than for sprint spikes, given the longer race
duration.

Middle distance spikes are a hybrid of a sprint shoe and a distance
shoe, featuring an intermediate level of taper, spike plate rigidity,
cushioning and support. Certain middle distance spikes are also popular
among hurdlers because they have a relatively steep taper for sprinting
and a cushioned heel for landings.

[Cross country](cross_country_running "wikilink") spikes usually have no
more than six spike points and are similar to distance spikes in many
respects. However, given the wide range of terrain encountered
off-track, cross country spikes have a more durable rubber sole and
supportive mid-foot to provide a level of cushioning and stabilization
not required on a track. Depending on race length, surface types and
personal preference, cross country spikes may be abandoned in favor of
[racing flats](racing_flats "wikilink").

Shoes for field events and specialty events vary widely depending upon
the specific requirements of each event. For example, [long
jump](long_jump "wikilink") shoes are most similar to sprint spikes to
provide good top speed, [high jump](high_jump "wikilink") shoes have
flat bottoms and heel spikes to allow energy transfer through the entire
foot, and [steeplechase](Steeplechase_(athletics) "wikilink") shoes are
predominantly a water-resistant mesh for exceptional ventilation. While
shoes for [shot put](shot_put "wikilink"),
[discus](discus_throw "wikilink") and [hammer
throw](hammer_throw "wikilink") have flat rubber soles with no spikes,
they may still occasionally be referred to as "track spikes."

Notable spike manufacturers include [Adidas](Adidas "wikilink"),
[Asics](ASICS "wikilink"), [Brooks](Brooks_Sports,_Inc. "wikilink"),
[Mizuno](Mizuno_Corporation "wikilink"), [New
Balance](New_Balance "wikilink"), [Nike](Nike,_Inc. "wikilink"), [Puma
AG](Puma_AG "wikilink"), [Reebok](Reebok "wikilink") and
[Saucony](Saucony "wikilink").

## Types of spikes

![](TrackSpikesWithWrench.jpg "fig:TrackSpikesWithWrench.jpg") While
most spikes are between 3/16 inch (5 mm) and 1/2 inch (12 mm) long, the
most common is 1/4 inch (6 mm). Additionally, there are various
specialty lengths, as well as minimal "blank" spikes (also called studs)
used to cover a spike well. Spikes are generally metal or ceramic and
come in three main types: the pyramid, the needle (pin), and the
compression tier (Christmas tree). Pyramids are conical spikes that
taper to a sharp point. They normally have a maximum diameter nearly
equal to the diameter of the threads of the spike. Needles also have a
sharp point, but a thinner cone diameter. Track spikes create traction
by penetrating the track surface. Some tracks do not allow pin spikes
and limit the length of pyramid spikes to minimize damage to the track.
A variation for synthetic tracks is the Christmas tree spike. It uses a
terraced cone shape with a flat end to compress rather than penetrate
the track below it and use the track's reaction force to return energy
to the runner, increasing the runner's speed. Since it does not
penetrate the track surface, it reduces wear on the track. Since the end
is flat rather than pointed, it is less harmful to other runners in the
event of being "spiked." Lastly, there are Tartan spikes that are dull
that are most commonly used for rubber tracks.
![](Types_of_track_spikes.jpg "fig:Types_of_track_spikes.jpg")

## See also

-   [Racing flats](Racing_flats "wikilink")
-   [Cleat (shoe)](Cleat_(shoe) "wikilink")
-   [Comparison of orthotics](Comparison_of_orthotics "wikilink")
-   [Starting blocks](Starting_blocks "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Athletic shoes](Category:Athletic_shoes "wikilink")
[Category:Sport of athletics
equipment](Category:Sport_of_athletics_equipment "wikilink")
[Category:Sport of athletics
terminology](Category:Sport_of_athletics_terminology "wikilink")
[Category:English inventions](Category:English_inventions "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] University of Nebraska Newsroom.
<http://newsroom.unl.edu/announce/stories/9613>

[9] Greensword, Marlon (2010). [BIOMECHANICAL EVALUATION OF MODIFIED
TRACK
SHOES](http://etd.lsu.edu/docs/available/etd-03142010-223313/unrestricted/BiomechanicalEvaluationofModifiedTrackShoes_GreenswordM.pdf)