![](EvzoneTsarouhiKaltsodetes.jpg "EvzoneTsarouhiKaltsodetes.jpg")

A **tsarouchi** (; plural: τσαρούχια; from Turkish *çarık*) is a type of
[shoe](shoe "wikilink"), which is typically known nowadays as part of
the traditional [uniform](uniform "wikilink") worn by the
[Evzones](Evzones "wikilink") of the [Greek Presidential
Guard](Presidential_Guard_(Greece) "wikilink").[1]

## Description

Their origin is obscure and goes back to the Byzantine times, with
influences from styles imported by neighbouring tribes, including the
[Turks](Turkic_peoples "wikilink"). Originally, various types of similar
shoes were worn all over the [Balkans](Balkans "wikilink"), but
*tsarouchia* are mainly associated with the [Greeks](Greeks "wikilink").
They were the most common footwear worn by both urban and rural Greeks,
mainly men, but also many women. After the Greek independence in early
19th century, their use was limited to isolated rural areas and nomadic
populations, seen by westernised urbanites as a sign of uncouthness and
backwardness. In a version with reinforced sole, they remained the issue
boot for the [Evzone](Evzone "wikilink") units well into the 20th
century, though after the [First World War](First_World_War "wikilink")
were gradually replaced in active service by the standard laced boot.
*Tsarouciia* provide a clear link with the origin of the Evzone uniform
in the traditional Greek costume, and with the fact that Evzones were
largely enlisted from rural mountainous regions of Greece. Nowadays they
are almost exclusively used by the presidential guard and in various
traditional festivals and dances along with other traditional Greek
garments. ![](Tsarouchi.jpg "fig:Tsarouchi.jpg"))\]\]

*Tsarouchia* are typically made of a number of pieces of stiff leather
hand-sewn together, in the [moccasin](moccasin "wikilink") fashion. They
have a characteristic pointy nose, usually covered by a large woolen
[pompon](Pom-pom "wikilink"), which often occurs in Turkey as well. The
latter was a relatively late addition, originally a way of making the
shoe nose waterproof, but increasingly becoming an essential feature for
their decoration.[2] Simpler versions also exist, made from one piece of
leather held in shape with thongs (a very common type found everywhere
in the Balkans and Anatolia, e.g., [Opanak](Opanak "wikilink") or
[Charvuli](Charvuli "wikilink")) and without any decoration.

[Tsarouchis](Tsarouchis "wikilink") (Τσαρούχης) is also a Greek surname,
with [Yannis Tsarouchis](Yannis_Tsarouchis "wikilink") being the most
famous person bearing it.

[Aromanians](Aromanians "wikilink") from Balkans have a similar word for
shoes, "tsâruhi". Countryside tsâruhi were made out of leather piece.

## References

[Category:Military uniforms](Category:Military_uniforms "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Greek
clothing](Category:Greek_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]