![](UggBoots_SMC.JPG "fig:UggBoots_SMC.JPG") **Ugg boots**[1] are a
unisex style of [sheepskin boot](sheepskin_boots "wikilink") originating
in Australia and [New Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink"). The boots are
typically made of twin-faced [sheepskin](sheepskin "wikilink") with
fleece on the inside, a tanned outer surface and a synthetic sole. The
term "ugg boots" originated in Australia, initially for utilitarian
footwear worn for warmth, and which were often worn by surfers during
the 1960s. In the 1970s, the boots were introduced to the [surf
culture](surf_culture "wikilink") of the United Kingdom and the United
States. Sheepskin boots became a fashion trend in the U.S. in the late
1990s and as a worldwide trend in the mid-2000s. In Australia, they are
worn predominantly as [slippers](slipper "wikilink") and often
associated with "[daggy](Dag_(subculture) "wikilink")" fashion sense and
"[bogan](bogan "wikilink")" culture.[2]

Prior legal disputes between some manufacturers of sheepskin boots arose
as to distinguish whether "ugg" is a protected trademark, or a generic
term and thus ineligible for trademark protection. There are more than
70 registered trademarks that include the term "ugg" in various logos
and designs in Australia and New Zealand, as the term is considered a
generic reference to a type of shoe.[3][4][5][6] Outside Australia and
New Zealand, [UGG](UGG_(brand) "wikilink") is a brand manufactured by
the California-based [Deckers Outdoor
Corporation](Deckers_Outdoor_Corporation "wikilink"), with most of its
manufacturing based in China and with registered trademarks in over 130
countries worldwide including the US, UK, Canada, all [European
Union](European_Union "wikilink") members, and China.[7][8]

A noteworthy manufacturer in Australia and New Zealand is the Luda
Productions of Australia, which has roughly 75% of the market share in
Australia;[9] [EMU Australia](EMU_Australia "wikilink"); Euram Ugg; Blue
Mountains Ugg Boots; Original UGG Boots; Mortels Sheepskin Factory;
[Bearpaw](Bearpaw_(footwear) "wikilink");
[Uggs-N-Rugs](Uggs-N-Rugs "wikilink"); Binder Corporation and Westhaven
Industries. Deckers is the leading manufacturer of the footwear style
outside Australia.[10] By 2010, worldwide sales by Australian
manufacturers combined equaled 5.9% of Deckers UGG boots sales,[11] with
UGG dominating the world market.[12]

## History

![](Ugg_boots_gnangarra_03.JPG "fig:Ugg_boots_gnangarra_03.JPG") using a
cutting press\]\]
![](Ugg_boots_gnangarra_11.JPG "fig:Ugg_boots_gnangarra_11.JPG")

There are different claims to the origins of the ugg boot style.
Artisanal sheepskin boots were known in rural Australia during the
1920s,[13] and were reportedly worn by
[shearers](Sheep_shearer "wikilink") as they found them resistant to
wool yolk ([Lanolin](Lanolin "wikilink")), which would rot their
ordinary boots. However, the date of commercial manufacturing began
remains unclear. The boots were reportedly being manufactured in 1933 by
Blue Mountains Ugg Boots of New South Wales.[14] Frank Mortel of Mortels
Sheepskin Factory has stated that he began manufacturing the boots in
the late 1950s.[15][16] Surfer Shane Stedman of Australia has stated in
interviews that he invented the ugg boot.[17] Perth sheepskin boot
manufacturers Bruce and Bronwyn McDougall of
[Uggs-N-Rugs](Uggs-N-Rugs "wikilink") have manufactured the boots since
the late 1970s.[18]

The origin of the term "ugg" is also unclear. Stedman registered the
trademark "UGH-BOOTS" in Australia in 1971, and in 1982 registered the
"UGH" trademark.[19] Frank Mortel claims that he named his company's
sheepskin boots "ugg boots" in 1958 after his wife commented that the
first pair he made were "ugly."[20][21][22] Some accounts have suggested
that the term grew out of earlier variations, such as the "fug boots"
worn by [United Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink") [Royal Air
Force](Royal_Air_Force "wikilink") pilots during [World War
I](World_War_I "wikilink").[23]

The 1970s saw the emergence of advertising using the UGG and UGH terms
both in trade names and as a generic term in Australia.[24] The
*[Macquarie Dictionary](Macquarie_Dictionary "wikilink")* of the
Australian language first included a definition for "ugg boot" as a
generic term for sheepskin boots in its 1981 edition.[25] (After Stedman
complained to the editors of Macquarie, a trademark notation was added
to subsequent editions indicating that "UGH" was a trade mark).[26]

In the 1970s, ugg boots became popular among competitive
[surfers](surfing "wikilink").[27][28][29] After [movie
theatres](movie_theatre "wikilink") in [Sydney](Sydney "wikilink")
banned ugg boots and ripped [jeans](jeans "wikilink"), the footwear
became somewhat popular in the youth market as a sign of rebellion.[30]
Sheepskin footwear accounts for around 10 percent of footwear production
in Australia.[31]

### International sales

Surfing helped popularise the boots outside Australia and New Zealand.
Advertisements for Australian sheepskin boots first appeared in
Californian surf magazines in 1970.[32] By the mid-1970s, several surf
shops in [Santa Cruz, California](Santa_Cruz,_California "wikilink") and
the [San Fernando Valley](San_Fernando_Valley "wikilink") were selling a
limited number of boots purchased by the shops' owners while visiting
surfing events in Australia.[33] In 1978, a Western Australian
manufacturer of sheepskin boots, Country Leather, advertised outside
Australia for distributors to sell its sheepskin boots, which were made
from sheepskin sourced from [Jackson's
Tannery](EMU_Australia "wikilink") in [Geelong](Geelong "wikilink"),
Victoria.[34] Seeing the popularity of the boots among American surfers,
Australian surfer Brian Smith, then living in [Santa Monica,
California](Santa_Monica,_California "wikilink"), bought boots from
Country Leather but was unhappy with the brand and decided to register
UGG as his own trademark. Family friends invested $20,000 into the new
venture and the group set up Ugg Imports.[35] Due to other business
commitments, in 1979 Jensen handed over his share of the company to
Smith. In 1987 Smith registered Ugg Holdings Inc. and in 1985 registered
a U.S. trademark on a ram's head logo with the words "Original UGG Boot
UGG Australia." In 1995, Ugg Holdings purchased Stedman's various
trademarks.[36] As for the ugg name, Smith stated: "We always called
them uggs, long before it was trademarked."[37]

Shoe manufacturer Hide & Feet in [Newquay](Newquay "wikilink"), Cornwall
began manufacturing sheepskin boots in 1973, and in 1990 Nick Whitworth
and his wife Kath bought the business and registered "UGG" as a trade
mark in the UK. Due to increasing popularity and sales, in 1991 the
company changed its name to "The Original Ugg Co." In 1999, Whitworth
sold the company name and the British UGG trade mark to Deckers Outdoor
Corporation, renaming his company the Celtic Sheepskin Company.[38]

By 1994, UGG boots had grown in status among surfers in California with
80% of sales in southern [Orange
County](Orange_County,_California "wikilink") where Ugg Holdings saw an
increase in sales of 60 percent on the previous season. Smith's UGG
boots gained international exposure when they were worn by the U.S.
Olympic team in [Lillehammer](Lillehammer "wikilink") for the [1994
Winter Olympics](1994_Winter_Olympics "wikilink").[39] Australian
manufacturers also saw an increase in exports of sheepskin boots to the
United States, although Ugg Holdings retained an estimated 80% market
share. By the end of the year, Country Leather had opened its own shop
in [Redondo Beach](Redondo_Beach,_California "wikilink") to promote an
expansion of the brand from its established surf market into mainstream
footwear sales and Ugg Holdings began sourcing UGG boots directly from
Jackson's Tannery, which had changed its name to [EMU
Australia](EMU_Australia "wikilink").[40][41] In early 1995, Smith
promoted the UGG AUSTRALIA brand on the [Rush
Limbaugh](Rush_Limbaugh "wikilink") show, which spurred sales while the
brand gained further exposure when the [San Diego
Chargers](San_Diego_Chargers "wikilink") started wearing them. According
to retailers, it was not just the footwear that attracted consumers, but
the "made in Australia" [tie-in](tie-in "wikilink") as the boots were a
unique product only available from Australia and Australian products
were at that time very popular.[42][43] In August 1995, Smith sold Ugg
Holdings to [Deckers Outdoor
Corporation](Deckers_Outdoor_Corporation "wikilink") for $14.6
million.[44][45][46] In 1996 Deckers registered the various trademarks
for "UGG" in the U.S.[47][48]

Australian ugg boots are not considered fashionable in their countries
of origin and are worn for warmth and comfort.[49] Ugg boots in
Australia are worn predominantly as [slippers](slipper "wikilink") and
associated with "[daggy](Dag_(subculture) "wikilink") fashion sense,
[bogan](bogan "wikilink") behaviour" and the "[outer
suburbs](Slum "wikilink")" when worn in public.[50][51][52][53]
According to Australian fashion stylist Justin Craig: "The only people
who get away with wearing them are models, who give out the message:
'I'm so beautiful, I can look good in any crap."[54] The Deckers UGG
brand emerged as a fashion trend in the US through Deckers' actions to
promote it as a high fashion brand.[55][56] Deckers solicited
endorsements from celebrities such as [Kate
Hudson](Kate_Hudson "wikilink"), [Sarah Jessica
Parker](Sarah_Jessica_Parker "wikilink"),[57][58] [Cameron
Diaz](Cameron_Diaz "wikilink"), [Leonardo
DiCaprio](Leonardo_DiCaprio "wikilink") and [Jennifer
Lopez](Jennifer_Lopez "wikilink"),[59] and product placements in
television series such as *[Sex and the
City](Sex_and_the_City "wikilink"),* and films such as *[Raising
Helen](Raising_Helen "wikilink")*.[60][61] This marketing campaign "led
to an exponential growth in the brand's popularity and
recognizability."[62] The company reported US$689 million in UGG sales
in 2008,[63] almost a 50-fold increase from 1995.[64]

## Design

![](Ugg_boots.jpg "fig:Ugg_boots.jpg") Traditional Australian ugg boots
are made from sheepskins with fleece attached. The fleece is tanned into
the leather and the boot is assembled with the fleece on the inside.
Some ugg boots have a synthetic sole, commonly made from [Ethylene-vinyl
acetate](Ethylene-vinyl_acetate "wikilink") (EVA). The stitching is
often prominent on the outside of the boot. The natural insulative
properties of sheepskin gives isothermal properties to the boots: the
thick fleecy fibres on the inner part of the boots wick moisture and
allow air to circulate, keeping the feet at body temperature[65] and
allowing the boots to keep feet warm in cold weather and cool in hot
weather.[66] Produced by a number of manufacturers, they come in a
variety of colours, including black, pink, blue, chestnut, and
fuchsia.[67] They are available in both pull-on and lace-up varieties
and their height can range from just above the ankle to above the
knee.[68]

Some variations of ugg style boots have also been made from kangaroo fur
and leather. There are also synthetic boots. Although derided as "fake"
by some in the industry, their lower price made them appealing to large
retail chains such as [Myer](Myer "wikilink").[69]

### Animal rights

Sheep-skin is a by-product of processing sheep for human consumption.
That is, sheep are not specifically killed for their skins. Because it
is a by-product, the supply of sheep-skin is limited by the number of
sheep processed for the meat industry. The rise in the popularity of
"UGG"-branded ugg boots has been the "driving force" in recent
shortages, which have seen sheep-skin prices from 2010 to 2012 increase
by up to 80%.[70]

Being one of many clothing products made from animal
[skin](Hide_(skin) "wikilink"), the production of sheepskin boots has
been the subject of criticism by the [animal rights
movement](animal_rights_movement "wikilink") with producers responding
by improving animal welfare.[71] Animal rights groups call for the
boycott of sheepskin boots and their replacement with synthetic
alternatives.[72] In 2007, [Pamela
Anderson](Pamela_Anderson "wikilink"), realizing that the boots were
made of skin, called for a boycott on her website.[73] In February 2008,
the Princeton Animal Welfare Society staged a campus protest against the
fur industry, particularly attacking the sheepskin boot industry.[74]

## Trademark disputes

The trademarking of the UGG name has been the subject of dispute in
several countries. [Deckers Outdoor
Corporation](Deckers_Outdoor_Corporation "wikilink") has won disputes in
the United States,[75] the Netherlands,[76] and Turkey.[77] In Australia
and New Zealand, ugg is a generic term. The trademark for "Ugh-Boots"
has been removed from the trademark registry for non-use.[78] Outside
Australia and New Zealand, [UGG](UGG_(brand) "wikilink") (*written in
capital letters*) is a registered [trademark](trademark "wikilink") of
[Deckers Outdoor
Corporation](Deckers_Outdoor_Corporation "wikilink").[79]

The first trademark application for UGG in the United States was filed
by Brian Smith’s company in 1984.[80] In the 1990s, Smith and then
Deckers secured additional registrations in the U.S. and other
countries.[81][82] In 1999, Deckers began asserting its new trademark
and sent out [cease and desist](cease_and_desist "wikilink") letters to
Australian manufacturers that were selling sheepskin boots outside of
Australia via the internet.[83] By the early 2000s, demand for UGG boots
was soaring with Australian and U.S.-based manufacturers selling
sheepskin boots over the Internet. There was confusion among consumers
between generic ugg boots made in Australia and Deckers' UGG brand
boots. Deckers' law firm Middletons of
[Melbourne](Melbourne,_Australia "wikilink") began a serious effort to
halt the Australian companies' sales[84] by sending cease and desist
letters to a number of Australian and U.S.-based manufacturers,
preventing them from selling sheepskin boots using the UGG trademark on
[eBay](eBay "wikilink") or from using the word in their registered
business names or [domain names](domain_name "wikilink").[85][86]
Deckers initiated numerous domain name actions under the
[UDRP](Uniform_Domain-Name_Dispute-Resolution_Policy "wikilink").[87][88]

In response to these actions by Deckers, some Australian manufacturers
formed the Australian Sheepskin Association to fight the corporation's
claim, arguing that "ugg" is a generic term referring to flat-heeled,
pull-on sheepskin boots. One of these manufacturers,
[Perth's](Perth,_Western_Australia "wikilink")
[Uggs-N-Rugs](Uggs-N-Rugs "wikilink"), who had been manufacturing ugg
boots since 1978 and selling them online since 1996, appealed to
Australian trademark regulators.[89] The officer who heard the case
stated that the "evidence overwhelmingly supports the proposition that
the terms (ugg, ugh and ug boots) are interchangeably used to describe a
specific style of sheepskin boot and are the first and most natural way
in which to describe these goods." In 2006 Uggs-N-Rugs won the right to
use the term UGG BOOT/S and variations such as UGH BOOT/S within
Australia.[90] Deckers retained the trademark rights to their UGG logo
in Australia as trademark protection only applies to the way the mark
appears in its entirety and not the words it contains. IP Australia also
ruled that the trademark "UGH-boots" (with hyphen) should be removed
from the trademark register for non-use as Deckers had only been using
the UGG logo, not the UGH marks.[91][92] This 2006 ruling applies only
in Australia and Deckers still owns the trademarks in other
jurisdictions such as the US, [China](China "wikilink"),
[Japan](Japan "wikilink") and the [European
Union](European_Union "wikilink").[93]

## See also

-   [2000s in fashion](2000s_in_fashion "wikilink")
-   [2010s in fashion](2010s_in_fashion "wikilink")
-   [Mukluk](Mukluk "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   Documentary film on the trademark dispute:
-   "[Save Our Aussie Icon](http://www.saveouraussieicon.com/)" –
    campaign against the trademark
-   U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: "\[<http://tess2.uspto.gov/>"
    Trademark Search\]"
-   World Intellectual Property Office: "[Trademark
    Search](https://web.archive.org/web/20101009053540/http://www.wipo.int/ipdl/en/madrid/)"
-   A
    [listing](http://www.keepandshare.com/doc/1834017/UGGglobaltms-pdf-march-31-2010-3-03-pm-88k?da=y)
    of Deckers Outdoor Corporation trademarks containing the word UGG,
    registered in over 100 countries.

[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Australian
clothing](Category:Australian_clothing "wikilink") [Category:New Zealand
fashion](Category:New_Zealand_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Australian
inventions](Category:Australian_inventions "wikilink") [Category:New
Zealand inventions](Category:New_Zealand_inventions "wikilink")
[Category:2000s fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2010s fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6] Trade Marks Hearings 16 January 2006. Decision of a delegate of the
registrar of trade marks with reasons. Pg 10

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30] [The Ugg inventor who gave £500m the
boot](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-1356679/The-Ugg-inventor-gave-500m-boot-He-sold-idea-10-000-free-pairs-year.html)
[Mail Online](Mail_Online "wikilink") 14 February 2011

[31]

[32] Conley, Lucas [Behind the Brand: The Golden
Fleece](http://magazine.wsj.com/features/behind-the-brand/the-golden-fleece/)
[Wall Street Journal](Wall_Street_Journal "wikilink") 9 September 2010.

[33] Brian Smith *Booty Call* [Los Angeles
Magazine](Los_Angeles_Magazine "wikilink") 1 October 2001 Pg 75

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37] [From Ugg to
uglier](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/australiaandthepacific/australia/1455657/From-Ugg-to-uglier.html)
[The Telegraph](Telegraph_Media_Group "wikilink") 29 February 2004

[38]

[39] Foster, Caryl [Ugg's going mainstream with slimmer
boots](https://web.archive.org/web/20140610171052/http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-15201264.html)
Footwear News. [Condé Nast
Publications](Condé_Nast_Publications "wikilink") 14 February 1994.
[HighBeam Research](HighBeam_Research "wikilink") accessed 7 September
2012

[40]

[41] Cronin, Emily [The story of
Ugg](http://fashion.telegraph.co.uk/article/TMG8283572/The-story-of-Ugg.html)
[The Daily Telegraph](The_Daily_Telegraph "wikilink") 30 January 2011

[42] McAllister, Robert [The Aussie invasion. Australian footwear
manufacturers export to the
U.S.](https://web.archive.org/web/20140610171025/http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-16414971.html)
Footwear News. [Condé Nast
Publications](Condé_Nast_Publications "wikilink") 6 February 1995.
[HighBeam Research](HighBeam_Research "wikilink") accessed 6 May 2012

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47] [The battle of the UGG BOOT
continues](http://hyneslegal.com.au/news/the-battle-for-the-ugg-boot-continues-nar-100)
Hynes Lawyers 11 February 2011

[48]

[49]

[50] [The uggly side of
life](http://www.theage.com.au/news/danny-katz/the-uggly-side-of-life/2006/09/27/1159337216912.html)
[The Age](The_Age "wikilink"), 27 September 2006.

[51] [The boganvillea is flowering and the hats are on the
Kat](http://www.theage.com.au/opinion/the-boganvillea-is-flowering-and-the-hats-are-on-the-kat-20110622-1gfcr.html)
[The Age](The_Age "wikilink") 23 June 2011

[52] [Living east of
Boganville?](http://www.madrigal.com.au/2011/10/27/livingeast-of-boganville/)
Madrigal Communications, 27 October 2011.

[53] [Albion Park: home of the giant ugg
boot?](http://www.illawarramercury.com.au/news/local/news/general/albion-park-home-of-the-giant-ugg-boot/1615170.aspx)
[Illawarra Mercury](Illawarra_Mercury "wikilink"), 5 September 2009.

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58] Brown, Suzanne S. (21 December 2003) [Ooh, so comfy, but ugh! so
hard to
find](http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2003-12-21/features/0312210502_1_ugg-australia-boots-surfers)
[Chicago Tribune](Chicago_Tribune "wikilink") p. 7B.

[59] "Aus weichem Wildleder mit Butter."
*[Cernotazi](http://cernotazi.wordpress.com/),* 3 November 2012.
Accessed 26 March 2013.

[60]

[61] Silverstein, Barry. "UGG Australia: the good, the bad, and the
UGGly."
[BrandChannel.com](http://www.brandchannel.com/features_profile.asp?pr_id=365)
, 10 December 2007. Accessed 26 March 2013.

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70] [Sheepskin and Shearling Frequently asked
Questions](http://www.shepherdsflock.com/faq.html) Shepherd's Flock

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77] [Website of Walker Morris UK solicitors firm,
Leeds.](http://www.walkermorris.co.uk/content.aspx?id=1771) "Legal
Briefing from the Trade Marks and Designs Group, 3 October 2011."

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]