![](Valenki.jpg "Valenki.jpg")

**Valenki** (; [sg](Grammatical_number "wikilink") **valenok** ()) are
traditional [Russian](Russia "wikilink") winter footwear, essentially
[felt](felt "wikilink") [boots](boot "wikilink"): the name *valenok*
literally means "made by [felting](felt "wikilink")". Valenki are made
of [wool](wool "wikilink") [felt](felt "wikilink"). They are not
water-resistant, and are often worn with [galoshes](galoshes "wikilink")
to keep water out and protect the [soles](Sole_(shoe) "wikilink") from
wear and tear. Valenki were once the footwear of choice for many
Russians, but in the second half of the 20th century they lost most of
their appeal in cities, due to their association with rustic dress.

## Description

Valenki (synonymic and semantic related expressions which mean the same
– vа́lenukhi (pl.), vа́lezhki, vа́leni, vа́lentsi, kа́tanki) – warm felted
highboots made from dried sheep’s wool; they are usually hard by their
form, but there are soft types which are made for a corresponding
footwear.

Valenki are a kind of traditional Russian footwear which is usually worn
for walking on dry snow when the weather is frosty. Valenki wear out
most quickly from the bottom and very often are soled with leather or
other durable material to prevent this, so they are often worn with
[galoshes](galoshes "wikilink"). Also, to protect from getting wet –
they use a rubber sole, and there are valenki with glue-sew and molded
soles. Traditionally, valenki come in brown, black, gray and white, but
the last few years, consumers have been able to order these boots in a
variety of colors (red, blue, purple, green, yellow, orange).

Valenki are included in standard of supplying officers and the ranks of
the internal military service of the Russian army with warm clothes and
gear.[1]

![](Russie.jpg "fig:Russie.jpg") Valenki stem from the traditional felt
boots worn by nomads of the Great Steppe (including Southern
[Rus'](Rus'_(region) "wikilink")), whose history goes back over 1500
years.

However, as it’s supposed, the boots appeared at the beginning of the
18th century. Valenki became widespread only in the first half of the
19th century, when they started being manufactured by industrial
methods. Before this, they were quite expensive and only wealthy people
could afford to have them. The increasing complexity of needs, the
growing influence of the urban mores to the village caused the change of
bast shoes with felt boots, and with it, the broad development of
fulling production.

Valenki became less popular in the urban life in recent decades because
winters in [Central Russia](Central_Federal_District "wikilink") turned
to be more soft and slushy, and as result, lighter and waterproof
footwear gradually won popularity and replaced valenki. Valenki are
associated with a traditional rustic style of clothing; in cities they
are usually worn by small children, or they are worn by one and all in a
severe [frost](Russian_winter "wikilink"), when other shoes don’t
protect from the cold.

Before the [revolution](Russian_Revolution_(1917) "wikilink"), the
production of valenki was concentrated in the Semenov district of
[Nizhny Novgorod](Nizhny_Novgorod "wikilink") province, in the
[Kineshma](Kineshma "wikilink") District of [Kostroma
province](Kostroma_Oblast "wikilink"), and in the
[Kukmor](Kukmorsky_District "wikilink") in [Kazan
province](Kazan_Governorate "wikilink"). In 1900, contemporary jackboot
[fulling](fulling "wikilink") factories of Russia produced 1.4 million
pairs of valenki in the amount of 2.1 million
[rubles](ruble "wikilink").[2] In 1900, a pair of valenki cost 1.5
rubles, in 1912 - 2 rubles, at the end of 1916 the speculative price
reached up to 12-18 rubles per pair.

## See also

-   [Telogreika](Telogreika "wikilink")
-   [Ushanka](Ushanka "wikilink")
-   [Afghanka](Afghanka "wikilink")

## References

## Sources

-   Békési, László (2006) *Stalin's War: Soviet uniforms and militaria
    1941-45*. Ramsbury: The Crowood Press
-   Zaloga, Steven J. (1989) *The Red Army of the Great Patriotic War,
    1941-45*. London: Osprey

## External links

-

[Category:18th-century
fashion](Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:Folk
footwear](Category:Folk_footwear "wikilink") [Category:Russian folk
clothing](Category:Russian_folk_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Russian
inventions](Category:Russian_inventions "wikilink") [Category:Winter
clothes](Category:Winter_clothes "wikilink")

[1] Russian Federation Government Resolution of 17 July 1995 N 720 "On
Approval of the glove providing law for enforcement officers of the
Russian Federation and norms of supply of glove property for commanding
and enlisted personnel of the Interior of the Russian Federation, with
the special title of the internal service

[2] Statistical Yearbook for 1912, ed. V. Sharago, St. Petersburg, 1912.