**Vans Half Cab** was [Steve Caballero](Steve_Caballero "wikilink")'s
second signature [shoe](shoe "wikilink") offered from
[Vans](Vans "wikilink"). This shoe came out 3 years after the Caballero.
The new generation of skateboarders had been cutting the original
Caballero into a mid top to help them perform more dexterous street flip
tricks. Steve Caballero noticed this and Vans decided to offer a mid top
version in 1992. Long time and current Vans' employee, Bunny Caminiti,
altered the original Vans Caballero pattern to the sloped mid-top that
is now known as the Half Cab (Style 33 in Vans' non-sequential numbering
system).

## History

Street skaters were using the original high top Caballero shoe in their
own modified versions; they would cut the shoe down and then tape where
they had cut the shoe. The shoe had been re-invented for the first of
many times. "The Half Cab has become one of the most legendary skate
shoes of all time, worn by an entire generation of pro riders who
redefined street skating".[1] The Caballero patch was taken off the side
panel and was replaced with the words "Half Cab" and had a picture of
Cab performing a half cab, or half
[caballerial](caballerial "wikilink").

In 2005 the Cab low was released as a dual signature shoe between Cab
and former professional skateboarder Scott Kane. It featured a low top
version of the Cab with a cupsole, unlike the Cab and Half Cab which
featured Vans signature [vulcanized](vulcanized "wikilink") "Waffle
Grip". In 2007 the first Half Cab Pro was released. The differences
between the Half Cab and the pro included the outsole, insole, and the
use of premium materials. The outsole includes slightly shallower grip
pattern, the insole is thicker, and offers more padding than the regular
Half Cab and most other Vans and it is able to be taken out unlike most
other Vans where the insole is glued in.

In 2009 Vans re-introduced the Cab as part of a twenty-year celebration.
It was re-released in the original two colorways offered. In late 2009
the Cab low Vulc was introduced as a low top alternative to the mid.

The shoe is no exception to Vans collaborations with artists, bands,
companies, and skate shops and is often released under exclusive
colorways by itself, or in pack.

## Features

The Half Cab features a two piece toe cap, Vans signature Waffle Grip,
various side panels that were included in the design of the original
Cab, and is sold under the Vans Classic Line with upgraded version sold
in the Pro Skate category.

## References

## External links

-   [1](http://hypebeast.com/2009/01/vans-full-cab-caballero-20th-anniversary-pack/)
    The Hypebeast
-   [2](http://www.sneakerobsession.com/8944/history-behind-the-vans-half-cab//)
    Sneaker Obsession

[Category:Shoes](Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Skateboarding
equipment](Category:Skateboarding_equipment "wikilink")

[1] <http://skate.vans.com/SHOES/halfcab_pro/halfcab_pro.html>