![](Vibram_Five_Finger_Shoes.jpg "fig:Vibram_Five_Finger_Shoes.jpg")
**Vibram FiveFingers** are a type of [minimalist
shoe](minimalist_shoe "wikilink") manufactured by
[Vibram](Vibram "wikilink"), originally marketed as a more natural
alternative for different outdoors activities (sailing, kayaking,
canoeing, and as a camp or after-hike shoe).[1] The footwear is meant to
replicate being barefoot and has thin, flexible soles that are contoured
to the shape of the human foot, including visible individual sections
for the toes.[2] The company settled a lawsuit alleging false health
claims and set aside $3.75 million to pay refunds of up to $94 to anyone
who had purchased the product since March 21, 2009.[3]

## Origin

![](Vibram_FiveFingers_KSO_Trek_Brown.JPG "fig:Vibram_FiveFingers_KSO_Trek_Brown.JPG")
Invented in 1999 by Robert Fliri, a design student from
[Vinschgau](Vinschgau "wikilink") who wanted to "figure out a way to
move around in nature better." Vibram FiveFingers were developed and
introduced in 2005.[4][5][6][7][8][9]

### Purpose

Vibram FiveFingers were originally targeted to yacht racers to maintain
grip on slippery decks without compromising the barefoot experience.[10]
Their potential use as a minimalist running shoe was suggested to the
Vibram CEO by Ted McDonald, a runner who earned the nickname "Barefoot
Ted" for his unshod feet and successful career as a barefoot running
coach.[11] The purpose of these shoes as outlined by the manufacturers
is to provide footwear to be mainly used for fitness, running, water
sports, yoga, trekking and travelling, and other sports.[12]

## Design

### Styles

![](Vibram_FiveFingers_Spyridon_LS_Green-Grey-Black.JPG "fig:Vibram_FiveFingers_Spyridon_LS_Green-Grey-Black.JPG")
![](FiveFingers_Bikila_top_view_2.jpg "fig:FiveFingers_Bikila_top_view_2.jpg")
Vibram FiveFingers come in a variety of styles and sizes, including
FiveFingers KMD Sport, KMD Sport LS, Classic, Sprint, Flow, KSO (the
most popular), TrekSport, KSO Trek, Bikila (named for [Abebe
Bikila](Abebe_Bikila "wikilink")), Bikila LS, Speed and also men's
styles FiveFingers Spyridon, Trek LS and Bormio and women's styles
FiveFingers Jaya and Jaya LR.[13] Children's KSO, Sprint and Speed
styles are available.[14]

### Sizing

Unlike traditional footwear, Vibram FiveFingers do not follow the
typical US or UK shoe-sizing scales. They require precise foot length
measurement with accuracy of 1/8 inch (3 mm) and conversion to the
FiveFingers sizing chart. This ranges from 38–50 for men, 34–42 for
women, and 29–36 for children. As a result, the shoe sizing more closely
mirrors the EU system. However, minor discrepancies exist between the
women's and men's sizing, so, *e.g.*, a women's size 39 does not equal a
men's size 39.[15]

### Materials

Vibram FiveFingers comprise many different materials that vary depending
on the style of shoe. The most common components are Vibram TC-1
performance rubber, which makes up the sole of these shoes, a thin
stretch polyamide comprising the frame of the shoe that molds to the
contours of the user's foot, and an antimicrobial microfiber footbed.

## Minimalist shoes

In a report on an article in *[Nature](Nature_(journal) "wikilink")*,
co-author Daniel E. Lieberman stated that "People who wear conventional
running shoes tend to run with a significantly different
[strike](Foot_strike_(gait)#Foot_strike "wikilink") than those who run
in minimalist shoes or barefoot. More specifically, the ball of the foot
should strike the ground before the heel when running (or walking)
barefoot or in minimalist shoes. By landing on the middle or front of
the foot, barefoot runners have almost no impact collision."[16]
Lieberman et al.'s study was an experiment that involved five groups of
runners from [Kenya](Kenya "wikilink") and the [United
States](United_States "wikilink"). The two American groups were adult
athletes who had run with shoes since childhood, and those who
habitually [ran barefoot](barefoot_running "wikilink") or with minimal
footwear such as Vibram FiveFingers (mentioned by name in the study).
The three Kenyan groups were adults who had never run in shoes until
late adolescence, as well as two teenage groups: those that habitually
wore shoes and those that always ran barefoot. The runners were
instructed to run over a [force plate](force_plate "wikilink") that was
embedded in a 25-meter track, and were recorded during the run using a
three-dimensional infrared kinematic system. These measurements were
used to assess the pattern with which the foot strikes the ground and
how forcibly it does so.[17]
![](Toe_socks_+_toe_shoes.jpg "fig:Toe_socks_+_toe_shoes.jpg")

### Health effects

[Barefoot running](Barefoot_running "wikilink"), which is similar to
running with FiveFingers on, appears to decrease the risk of ankle
sprain and [plantar fasciitis](plantar_fasciitis "wikilink").[18]

If not conditioned slowly enough, especially when transitioning away
from heelstrike running or from wearing shoes with an elevated heel, the
sole of the foot or [plantar fascia](plantar_fascia "wikilink") can
become inflamed or damaged with activity.[19] Also due to over-training
or incorrect form, runners may experience Achilles tendonitis or
metatarsal inflammation and fractures. Over-striding in Vibram
FiveFingers, that is, landing with the foot too far in front of one's
hips, adds extra unnecessary stress to the calf muscles, Achilles
tendon, and the arch of the foot, which can lead to serious health
problems if not addressed.[20]

One study found a greater number of new wearers of FiveFingers showed an
increase in bone marrow [edema](edema "wikilink") than those in the
study's control group.[21] It recommended transition to use of the shoe
be very slow and gradual.

### Lawsuit

In 2012, an initial lawsuit was filed against Vibram over claims made
about their FiveFingers minimalist shoe. Vibram claimed that the shoe
"reduce\[s\] foot injuries and strengthen\[s\] foot muscles". While
Vibram has "expressly" denied "any actual or potential fault ... or
liability", on May 7, 2014 it was announced that company has moved to
settle the suit and agreed to set aside $3.75 million to pay refunds of
up to $94 to anyone who had purchased the product since March 21,
2009.[22]

## See also

-   [Jika-tabi](Jika-tabi "wikilink")
-   [Minimalist shoe](Minimalist_shoe "wikilink")
-   [Toe socks](Toe_socks "wikilink")
-   [Tabi](Tabi "wikilink")
-   [Vivobarefoot](Vivobarefoot "wikilink")
-   [Xero Shoes](Xero_Shoes "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-

-   [Have Shoes Changed the Way We
    Run?](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/8483401.stm)

-   [*The Vibram lawsuit, barefoot running and science perspectives*,
    The Science of
    Sport](http://sportsscientists.com/2014/05/vibram-lawsuit-barefoot-running-common-sense/)

[Category:Athletic shoes](Category:Athletic_shoes "wikilink")
[Category:Products introduced in
2006](Category:Products_introduced_in_2006 "wikilink")
[Category:Minimalist clothing](Category:Minimalist_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] ["The story of the five
fingers"](http://bodyconsciousdesign.com/uploads/interview_fliri_for_publication.pdf).
Bodyconsciousdesign. 2006. Retrieved October 16, 2011.

[6] Dziernak, Lou (November 2009). "Barefoot your Soul". SGB.
<doi:1933424561>. .

[7] "Vibram FiveFingers shoes". Steve van Dulken. 2009. Retrieved
October 16, 2011.

[8] Vonhof, John (2011). Fixing Your Feet: Prevention and Treatments for
Athletes. Wilderness press. pp. 85-86. .

[9] "Bare facts; Running fads". The Economist. September 16, 2011.
<doi:2458505431>.

[10] "Protect your feet at the beach, in the boat or at the mall with
shoes designed for water and land but with more support than a water
sock.". Star Tribune. June 20, 2006. <doi:1064219291>.

[11]

[12] "Men's Footwear." www.vibramfivefingers.com. Vibram, n.d. Web. 10
Nov 2011. \<\>.

[13] "Women's Footwear." www.vibramfivefingers.com. Vibram, n.d. Web. 10
Nov 2011. \<\>.

[14] "Kid's Footwear." www.vibramfivefingers.com. Vibram, n.d. Web. 10
Nov 2011.
\<<http://www.vibramfivefingers.com/products/kids_footwear.htm>\>.

[15] "Size Conversion Chart." www.vibramfivefingers.com. Vibram, n.d.
Web. 10 Nov 2011. \<\>.

[16]

[17]

[18] Warburton, Michael. "Barefoot Running may help keep runners on
their feet." Sportscience. (2001): n. page. Web. 10 Nov. 2011.
\<<http://www.sportsci.org/jour/0103/mw.htm>\>

[19]

[20]

[21] <http://unique-sportstime.de/site/wp-content/uploads/Barfuss-Laufen1.pdf>

[22]