**Volley**, formerly known as **Dunlop Volley** is a brand of
[sandshoe](sandshoe "wikilink") manufactured by Brand Collective.
Formerly, it was produced by [Dunlop Sport
(Australia)](Dunlop_Sport_(Australia) "wikilink"), part of [Pacific
Brands](Pacific_Brands "wikilink") which separated the Volley brand into
its Brand Collective Pty Ltd which was sold to private equity firm
Anchorage Capital Partners in November 2014.

![](DunlopVolley.jpg "fig:DunlopVolley.jpg") The shoe is constructed of
cotton canvas with a thermoplastic rubber sole. It was introduced by
[Dunlop Australia](Dunlop_Australia "wikilink") in 1939,[1] and has had
only minor changes to its design since then. Originally plain white in
colour with a vulcanised rubber sole, it evolved into the iconic [green
and gold](green_and_gold "wikilink") stripe along the ankle and heel
with a direct injection sole in the 1970s. Today, the standard design is
white with a 3-stripe woven tape on the heel, while the green and gold
stripe, and an all-black version, are also available.

In 1939, the Volley OC was released[2] In the 1970s, Dunlop released a
new style of Volley named the Volley International. The new model
featured a new design upper and direct injection thermo plastic sole.
From 1978 to 1985, there was a large volume of sales of the Volley in
Australia. It became virtually the standard tennis shoe, and was also
popular with [roofers](roofer "wikilink"), who needed a sure foothold on
sloping roof surfaces.[3]

During the early 1980s, Dunlop briefly released a 'basketball boot'
version of the Volley International which covered the ankle. These
shoes, which had the high-grip herringbone tread, were highly prized by
rafters and bushwalkers, who appreciated the dissipation of the friction
point at the heel, the reduced entry of sand and debris, and the
protection to the ankles against knocks from rocks when wading in
rapids. The cotton canvas around the ankle was a seamless extension of
the Volley's uppers; it did not seek to 'support' the ankle, only
protect it. However, the boot was unavailable by 1983.

In 1998, Dunlop Footwear moved production offshore and in 2004, Dunlop
Sport became part of the Pacific Brands group. By 2009, the Dunlop
volley brand was diluted with a vast array of casual slip on shoes and
plagued with production quality issues and constant supplier changes of
the Dunlop Volley.

In 2011, Dunlop created Volley as a stand-alone brand and revised the
"Volley International" back to its 1970s design and brought the original
OC and SS shoes back into the line up. Volley also released the High
Leap variation on the International by 2012.

From 2014 to 2017, Volley released some new styles which included the
Grass-Court this was launched through a collaboration with Tony Bianco
and helped Volley elevate the brand with the fist ever Volleys at over
$100 Retail AUD. These styles tied back to some of older Dunlop brand's
iconic heritage tennis silhouettes . Volley still remains one if not the
only brand to be able to sell its footwear across all Market Channels
from Department stores to some of the worlds best sneaker boutiques.
Following this Volley successfully opened stand alone stores in Shanghai
and Beijing, again leading the way for Australian brands into the
complex and fast moving Chinese market.

## Usage of the Dunlop Volley

The Volley was originally developed in 1939 as a tennis shoe by [Adrian
Quist](Adrian_Quist "wikilink"), a famous Australian tennis player and
employee of Dunlop. Adrian borrowed a pair of boat shoes (with
Herringbone sole) during his Davis Cup tournament win in the US and upon
his return, convinced Dunlop to develop this high grip sports shoe. The
original shoe was called the Volley OC (Orthopaedically Correct) and was
worn by Rod Laver, Margaret Court, Evonne Goolagong Cawley, Ken Rosewall
etc. The Volley OC continued up until the 1970s when it was replaced by
the Volley International which featured the three-stripe woven tape
around the heel, side quarter panels which secure the tongue, and new
look injection moulded rubber sole.

In 1976 [Mark Edmondson](Mark_Edmondson "wikilink") won the [Australian
Open](Australian_Open "wikilink")[4] catapulting the Volley back into
the spotlight.

The distinctive [herringbone](herringbone_pattern "wikilink") tread is
famous for its excellent grip, making the shoe a favourite among
roofers, [canyoners](canyoning "wikilink"),[5] and
[parkour](parkour "wikilink") practitioners.[6] The popularity with
tradespeople led to the development of Volley Safety shoes with steel
caps to meet work site safety requirements.

Dunlop Volleys were standard issue by the [Australian
Army](Australian_Army "wikilink") and [Royal Australian Air
Force](Royal_Australian_Air_Force "wikilink") until the late 1980s, and
are still issued by the [Royal Australian
Navy](Royal_Australian_Navy "wikilink"), although sometimes the Spalding
imitation shoe is substituted.

A pair of Volleys subjected to prolonged wear and tear will develop two
distinctive holes.[7] Firstly, where the canvas meets the rubber sole at
the big toe, and secondly, at the widest part of the shoe where the
little toe will subsequently be exposed.

## 2012 Australian Olympics team

The Dunlop Volley was included as part of the Australian Olympics team's
official uniform for the [2012 Summer
Olympics](2012_Summer_Olympics "wikilink").[8]

## References

## External links

-   [Volley footwear Australia website](http://www.volley.com.au/)

[Category:Athletic shoe
brands](Category:Athletic_shoe_brands "wikilink") [Category:Shoe
brands](Category:Shoe_brands "wikilink") [Category:Shoe companies of
Australia](Category:Shoe_companies_of_Australia "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]