![](Pink_wedge-heeled_sandals.jpg "fig:Pink_wedge-heeled_sandals.jpg")
**Wedge boots**, **wedgies**, or **lifties** are shoes and boots with a
[sole](Sole_(shoe) "wikilink") in the form of a wedge, such that one
piece of material, normally [rubber](rubber "wikilink"), serves as both
the sole and the [heel](heel "wikilink").

This design dates back to ancient Greece.[1] Greek Actors used to wear
these shoes to signify status. These were curial so the audience can be
able to identify who is of importance in stage plays. According to the
Kennedy Center, "tragic actors would don shoes called "buskins," or
raised platform shoes, to symbolize their superiority over comic actors,
who would wear plain socks."

## Women

Wedges for women are more common and often have a sole that is much
thicker at the back than at the front, making them [high-heeled boots or
shoes](High-heeled_footwear "wikilink"). Wedgies for women were
popularized by [Salvatore Ferragamo](Salvatore_Ferragamo "wikilink"),
who introduced the design to the Italian market in the late 1930s.[2]
The evolution of wedge heels became more and more colorful and
outrageous through the 1970s-1990s.

## Men

Men's wedge boots, usually called "wedgies," typically have low heels.
Men's boots of this kind became popular during the 1970s. They are
making a comeback in 2010s.. Fashion is known to come "full circle"
meaning that trends reappear every few years or decades.

Some forms of wedge boots, called [platform
boots](platform_boot "wikilink"), have thick soles throughout.

There are many styles available under the wedges footwear category; the
most common styles are low wedge, t-straps wedge, ankle straps wedge,
platform wedge, and closed-toe wedge.

## High fashion

In the high fashion world, Salvatore Ferragamo invented the cork wedge
shoe in the 1940s due to the economic sanctions against Italy. Ferragamo
could no longer afford to purchase steel for traditional heels. He
experimented with pieces of Sardinian cork. It was glued and trimmed
until the entire space between the sole and heel was solid.

## References

## Bibliography

-

[Category:Boots](Category:Boots "wikilink") [Category:1970s
fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")

[1] Bergstein. Page 21.

[2] Bergstein. Pages 20 to 22.