**Wildsmith Shoes** is a high-end English handmade
[footwear](footwear "wikilink") manufacturer, founded in London in 1847
by husband and wife team, Matthew and Rebecca Wildsmith. They based
their business on making and repairing [boots](boots "wikilink") for the
[Household Cavalry](Household_Cavalry "wikilink"). Wildsmith was bought
from John Wildsmith in 2013 by [Savile Row
tailoring](Savile_Row_tailoring "wikilink") company, [Cad & The
Dandy](Cad_and_the_Dandy "wikilink")[1] and was subsequently bought by
Herring Shoes in 2016 to produce luxury ready-to-wear men's footwear.[2]
John Wildsmith is widely credited with the saying, "You are either in
your bed or in your shoes so it pays to invest in both".[3]

## History

After opening their first shop, off London's
[Piccadilly](Piccadilly "wikilink"), Matthew and Rebecca Wildsmith
quickly gained a loyal following and began crafting bespoke shoes for
many Royals and luminaries. Subsequently, a ready-to-wear collection was
introduced.

The company moved to London's Duke Street in 1948 and then on to
[Princes Arcade](Princes_Arcade "wikilink") in the late 1960s. It was
around this time that the company began to gain a wider international
reputation as Matthew and Rebecca's great-grandson, John Wildsmith, took
the brand around the world. He gathered together a team of tailors and
shirt makers and they travelled across various countries delivering a
service that became known as The Three S's – suits, shirts and shoes.

Manufacture of the original Wildsmith ready to wear collections went to
Northampton in the 1960s and included manufacturers such as [Edward
Green](Edward_Green_Shoes "wikilink"). By the 1990s the brand had lost
its way and many styles were simply rebranded stock shoes from other
manufacturers with little of the original design for which Wildsmith had
been famous. The customer base, which has always been very strong in the
US and Japan as well as the UK dwindled. Famous wearers included actors
such as [David Niven](David_Niven "wikilink"), politicians and members
of the royal family.[4]

## The Wildsmith Loafer

In 1926 Matthew and Rebecca Wildsmith's grandson, Raymond Lewis
Wildsmith, made a bespoke country house shoe for [King George
VI](King_George_VI "wikilink"), to be worn inside with his shooting
hose. From there, the design was evolved to be a casual style for
outdoor wear which was then included in their ready to wear collection.
The shoe was first called the 582, then the Model 98 until finally
becoming known as "The Wildsmith Loafer".[5] This was London's first
introduction to the English loafer, a version of the generic slip-on
shoe. The style continues to be sold to this day as the Windsor Loafer.

## Method

The new range of shoes created under the ownership of Herring shoes
concentrates on unique designs and indulgence. All of the shoes are made
in Northamptonshire, England where the factories are specialists in the
[Goodyear](Goodyear_welt "wikilink") welting process that is at the core
of the designs. Some lines also have [oak bark](oak_bark "wikilink")
soles and in-channel stitching where the welt stitch is cleverly hidden
within the sole.

## Company today

Wildsmith was bought in 2016 by Herring Shoes as a sub-brand to keep the
famous Wildsmith name alive. The company continues to work with
Northamptonshire [cordwainers](cordwainer "wikilink"). Wildsmith shoes
are sold worldwide, with a price range generally between £300 and £500.

## References

## External links

-

-   [Q&A with Chay Cooper in The Holborn
    Magazine](http://theholbornmag.com/2013/08/30/qa-chay-cooper-wildsmith-shoes/)

[Category:1847 establishments in the United
Kingdom](Category:1847_establishments_in_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")
[Category:Shoe companies of the United
Kingdom](Category:Shoe_companies_of_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")
[Category:Shops in London](Category:Shops_in_London "wikilink")
[Category:Shoemakers](Category:Shoemakers "wikilink") [Category:Shoe
brands](Category:Shoe_brands "wikilink") [Category:English
brands](Category:English_brands "wikilink")

[1] [StyleForum, "Wildsmith shoe brand
resurrected"](http://www.styleforum.net/t/352357/wildsmith-shoe-brand-resurrected).
Accessed 18 October 2013

[2] [Wildsmith - First
Steps](http://www.cadandthedandy.co.uk/wardrobe/wildsmith-the-first-steps/)

[3]

[4]

[5] [1](http://www.wildsmith.com/the-wildsmith-loafer)