**Acrylic fibers** are [synthetic fibers](synthetic_fiber "wikilink")
made from a polymer ([polyacrylonitrile](polyacrylonitrile "wikilink"))
with an average [molecular weight](molecular_weight "wikilink") of
-100,000, about 1900 monomer units. For a fiber to be called "acrylic"
in the US, the polymer must contain at least 85%
[acrylonitrile](acrylonitrile "wikilink") [monomer](monomer "wikilink").
Typical comonomers are [vinyl acetate](vinyl_acetate "wikilink") or
[methyl acrylate](methyl_acrylate "wikilink").
[DuPont](DuPont "wikilink") created the first acrylic fibers in 1941 and
trademarked them under the name **Orlon**.[1] It was first developed in
the mid-1940s but was not produced in large quantities until the 1950s.
Strong and warm, acrylic fiber is often used for sweaters and tracksuits
and as linings for boots and gloves, as well as in furnishing fabrics
and carpets. It is manufactured as a filament, then cut into short
staple lengths similar to wool hairs, and spun into yarn.

Modacrylic is a modified acrylic fiber that contains at least 35% and at
most 85% [acrylonitrile](acrylonitrile "wikilink") monomer. The
comonomers [vinyl chloride](vinyl_chloride "wikilink"), [vinylidene
chloride](vinylidene_chloride "wikilink") or [vinyl
bromide](vinyl_bromide "wikilink") used in modacrylic give the fiber
flame retardant properties. End-uses of modacrylic include faux fur,
wigs, hair extensions and protective clothing.

## Production

The polymer is formed by [free-radical
polymerization](Radical_polymerization "wikilink") in aqueous
suspension. The fiber is produced by dissolving the polymer in a solvent
such as [N,N-dimethylformamide](Dimethylformamide "wikilink") (DMF) or
aqueous [sodium thiocyanate](sodium_thiocyanate "wikilink"), metering it
through a multi-hole spinnerette and coagulating the resultant filaments
in an aqueous solution of the same solvent (wet spinning) or evaporating
the solvent in a stream of heated inert gas (dry spinning). Washing,
stretching, drying and crimping complete the processing. Acrylic fibers
are produced in a range of [deniers](Denier_(unit) "wikilink"), usually
from 0.9 to 15, as cut staple or as a 500,000 to 1 million filament
[tow](tow_(fibre) "wikilink"). End uses include sweaters, hats,
hand-knitting yarns, socks, rugs, awnings, boat covers, and upholstery;
the fiber is also used as "[PAN](Polyacrylonitrile "wikilink")"
precursor for [carbon fiber](carbon_fiber "wikilink"). Production of
acrylic fibers is centered in the Far East, Turkey, India, Mexico, and
South America, though a number of European producers still continue to
operate, including Dralon and Fisipe. US producers have ended production
(except for specialty uses such as in friction materials, gaskets,
specialty papers, conductive, and stucco), though acrylic tow and staple
are still spun into yarns in the USA. In the late 1950's Courtaulds Ltd
began investigating the production of an acrylic fibre later to be
called "courtelle" by a process of solvent polymerisation. Methyl
acrylate (6%) and acrylonitrile were polymerised in a 50% solution of
sodium thiocyanate to produce a dope ready for spinning into a waterbath
to produce "courtelle" fibre in various grades of denier. The sodium
thiocyanate solution was reconcentrated and re used. The reaction was a
continuous process with about 5% of reactants being recycled. This
recycling process resulted in the build up of pollutants in the process
as did the recycling of the solvent. A great deal of research in the
Chemical engineering laboratory in Lockhurst Lane, Coventry, and on the
pre production pilot plant at Little Heath overcame the recycling
problems and resulted in the process becoming a commercial success at a
new production plant in Grimsby.

## Textile uses

Acrylic is lightweight, soft, and warm, with a
[wool](wool "wikilink")-like feel.[2] It can also be made to mimic other
fibers, such as cotton when spun on short staple equipment. Some acrylic
is extruded in colored or pigmented form; other is extruded in "ecru",
otherwise known as "natural," "raw white," or "undyed." Pigmented fiber
has the highest lightfastness. Its fibers are very resilient compared to
both other synthetics and natural fibers. Some acrylic is used in
clothing as a less expensive alternative to [cashmere](wool "wikilink"),
due to the similar feeling of the materials. Some acrylic fabrics may
fuzz or [pill](Pill_(textile) "wikilink") easily, though there are
low-pilling variants. Acrylic takes color well, is washable, and is
generally hypoallergenic. End-uses include socks, hats, gloves, scarves,
sweaters, home furnishing fabrics, and awnings. Acrylic can also be used
to make fake fur and to make many different knitted clothes.

As acrylic is a synthetic fiber, the larvae of [clothes
moths](clothes_moth "wikilink") are unable to digest it. However,
acrylic fibers that are blended with wool or soiled may be eaten as a
consequence of having blended fibers.[3]

Acrylic is the "workhorse" hand-crafting fiber for crafters who
[knit](knitting "wikilink") or [crochet](crochet "wikilink"); acrylic
yarn may be perceived as "cheap" because it is typically priced lower
than its natural-fiber counterparts, and because it lacks some of their
properties, including softness and propensity to felt. The fiber
requires heat to "relax" or set the shape of the finished garment, and
it isn't as warm when wet as alternatives like [wool](wool "wikilink").
Some hand-knitters also complain that the fiber "squeaks" when knitted,
or that it is painful to knit with because of a lack of "give" or
stretch in the yarn. On the other hand, it is machine-washable and
extremely color-fast. This makes it useful in certain items, like
garments for babies, which require constant washing. However it is much
more flammable than its natural fiber counterparts, so caution should be
used when making items for babies and children.

## Concerns

-   A team at Plymouth University in the UK spent 12 months analyzing
    what happened when a number of synthetic materials were washed at
    different temperatures in domestic washing machines, using different
    combinations of detergents, to quantify the
    [microfibres](microfibre "wikilink") shed. They found that acrylic
    was responsible for releasing nearly 730,000 tiny synthetic
    particles ([microplastics](microplastics "wikilink")) per wash, five
    times more than polyester-cotton blend fabric, and nearly 1.5 times
    as many as pure [polyester](polyester "wikilink").[4][5][6][7]
-   Ecologist Mark Browne discovered something scientifically important
    after months of tediously examining sediment along shorelines around
    the world. He noticed fiber waste that no one else had predicted.
    They were tiny, synthetic, and all over the coastline, with the
    greatest concentration near sewage outflows. Of the man-made
    material found on the shoreline, 85% were microfibers and matched
    the types of material (such as nylon and acrylic) used in
    clothing.[8]

## See also

-   [List of fabrics](List_of_fabrics "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Synthetic fibers](Category:Synthetic_fibers "wikilink")
[Category:Plastics](Category:Plastics "wikilink") [Category:Woven
fabrics](Category:Woven_fabrics "wikilink")

[1] [1941–69: Changing Times. Orlon® :
1941](http://www2.dupont.com/Phoenix_Heritage/en_US/landing_era4.html).
Dupont Corporation

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] [Inside the lonely fight against the biggest environmental problem
you've never heard of \| Guardian Sustainable
Business](https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/oct/27/toxic-plastic-synthetic-microscopic-oceans-microbeads-microfibers-food-chain).
*The Guardian* (2014-10-27). Retrieved on 2017-01-26.

[6]

[7]

[8] [Single clothes wash may release 700,000 microplastic fibres, study
finds \|
Environment](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/27/washing-clothes-releases-water-polluting-fibres-study-finds).
*The Guardian* (2016-09-27). Retrieved on 2017-01-26.