---
title: Aertex
permalink: /Aertex/
---

**Aertex** is a [British](/United_Kingdom "wikilink") clothing company
based in [Manchester](/Manchester "wikilink"), established in 1888, and
also the name of the [textile](/textile "wikilink") manufactured by the
company. It owns the trademark for Aertex fabric, a lightweight and
loosely [woven](/weaving "wikilink") [cotton](/cotton "wikilink")
material that is used to make shirts and underwear.[1] Aertex sells a
range of menswear.

## History

In the late 19th century Lewis Haslam, a Lancashire mill owner and
politician, began to link the partnering of holes and warmth and with
two medical colleagues, began experimenting with aeration; trapping air
within the warp and weft of fabric. The result was a fabric that
provided a barrier between the warmth of the skin and the chill of the
atmosphere and in 1888 they formed the Aertex Company. During World War
II the British Women's [Land Army](/Land_Army "wikilink") wore Aertex as
part of their uniform and all the British and Commonwealth land forces
in the Far East and Middle East wore Aertex bush shirts and jackets.
These uniforms were designated as Jungle Green for the Far East and
Khaki Drill for the Middle East.

In 1959 Aertex, together with [Ovaltine](/Ovaltine "wikilink"),
sponsored the 'All New Netball Associations' coaching film. By the 1960s
Aertex became a sports and school wear manufacturer in the UK, across a
range of sports including [tennis](/tennis "wikilink"),
[cricket](/cricket "wikilink"), [netball](/netball "wikilink") and
[football](/Soccer "wikilink"). The England football squad all wore
Aertex fabric jerseys manufactured by [Umbro](/Umbro "wikilink") during
the [1970 World Cup](/1970_FIFA_World_Cup "wikilink") in Mexico.

## Present day

Aertex still sells a range of menswear including polo and other shirts,
knitwear, and underwear.

## See also

-   [List of fabric names](/List_of_fabric_names "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Woven fabrics](/Category:Woven_fabrics "wikilink")
[Category:Manufacturing companies based in
Manchester](/Category:Manufacturing_companies_based_in_Manchester "wikilink")

[1] Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary, published 1913 by C. & G.
Merriam Co.