---
title: Batiste
permalink: /Batiste/
---

[thumb\|Detail of a linen batiste handkerchief, 19th
century](/File:Handkerchief,_embroidered_initials,_'H.S.'_--_White_applique_on_linen_batiste_with_needlepoint_fillings;_embroidered_initials._Made_in_Germany_or_Switzerland,_19th_century._LACMA_60.41.108.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb\|Shirt-waist from [Charvet](Charvet_Place_Vend√¥me "wikilink") in
fine batiste (1898)](/File:Fine_batiste_waist.jpg "wikilink")

**Batiste** is a fine cloth made from cotton, [wool](/wool "wikilink"),
[polyester](/polyester "wikilink"), or a blend, and the softest of the
lightweight [opaque](/Opacity_(optics) "wikilink") fabrics.

## History and description

Batiste is a balanced [plain weave](/plain_weave "wikilink"), a fine
cloth made from cotton or [linen](/linen "wikilink") such as
[cambric](/cambric "wikilink"). Batiste was often used as a lining
fabric for high-quality garments. Batiste is also used for handkerchiefs
(cotton batiste) and lingerie (batiste de soie).

In 1901 *Chambers's Twentieth Century Dictionary of the English
Language* defined batiste as "usual French name for cambric" or "applied
in commerce to a fine texture of linen and cotton".[1]

"Cambric" is a synonym of the French word *batiste*,[2] itself attested
since 1590.[3] *Batiste* itself comes from the
[Picard](/Picard_language "wikilink") *batiche*, attested since 1401,
derived from the old French *battre* for bowing wool. The modern form
*batiste* or *baptiste* comes from a popular merge with the
[surname](/surname "wikilink")
[Baptiste](/Baptiste_(disambiguation) "wikilink"), pronounced *Batisse*,
as indicated by the use of the expressions *thoile batiche* (1499) and
*toile de baptiste* (1536) for the same fabric.[4] The alleged[5]
invention of the fabric, around 1300, by a weaver called Baptiste or
Jean-Baptiste Cambray or Chambray, from the village of Castaing in the
[peerage](/peerage "wikilink") of [Marcoing](/Marcoing "wikilink"), near
Cambrai, has no historic ground.[6][7][8][9]

## Type

Lightweight opaque fabrics are very thin and light but not as
transparent as sheer fabrics. The distinction between the two is not
always pronounced. End uses include apparel and furnishings.
[Organdy](/Organdy "wikilink") (a sheer fabric), lawn, and batiste begin
as the same [greige](/greige "wikilink") goods. They differ from one
another in the way they are finished. Lawn and batiste do not receive
the acid finish and, thus, remain opaque. Better quality fabrics are
made of [combed yarns](/Combing "wikilink").

## See also

-   [Cambric](/Cambric "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Woven fabrics](/Category:Woven_fabrics "wikilink")

[1] Davidson, Thomas, comp. *Chambers's Twentieth Century Dictionary of
the English Language*. London: W. & R. Chambers; p. 79

[2] ''Oxford English Dictionary

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]