---
title: Broderie anglaise
permalink: /Broderie_anglaise/
---

**Broderie anglaise** (French, "English embroidery") is a whitework
needlework technique incorporating features of embroidery, cutwork and
needle lace that became associated with England, due to its popularity
there in the 19th century.

## History

Broderie anglaise is characterized by patterns composed of round or oval
holes, called *eyelets*, which are cut out of the fabric, then bound
with overcast or buttonhole stitches. The patterns, often depicting
flowers, leaves, vines, or stems, are further delineated by simple
embroidery stitches made on the surrounding material. Later broderie
anglaise also featured small patterns worked in satin stitch.

The technique originated in 16th century eastern Europe—probably in what
is now the Czech Republic—but remains associated with England because of
its popularity there during the 19th century. In the Victorian era,
broderie anglaise typically had open areas in many sizes. Transfers were
used first to lay out the design on the material. In some cases, the
holes were punched out with an embroidery stiletto before finishing the
edge; in other cases, the fabric was embroidered first, and the hole was
cut afterwards, with scissors. Beginning in the 1870s, the designs and
techniques of broderie anglaise could be copied by the Swiss
hand-embroidery machine. Today, most broderie anglaise is created by
machine.

Madeira work is a popular form of broderie anglaise associated with
artisans on the island of Madeira, a Portuguese territory off the coast
of Africa.

## Pop Culture

Broderie anglaise was extremely popular in England between 1840 and 1880
for women's underclothing and children's wear. The 1950s saw a
resurgence in popularity, when it was frequently used to trim dresses
and underwear. In 1959, Brigitte Bardot wore a dress of gingham and
broderie anglaise for her wedding to Jacques Charrier.

In contemporary western fashion, it has been featured on a wide variety
of modern garments such as shorts and even t-shirts. It has been
characterized as "lace, but scaled-up" making it more robust and suited
to daytime wear, and less associated with the fine, lacy look of
lingerie. [Category:Embroidery](/Category:Embroidery "wikilink")
[Category:European clothing](/Category:European_clothing "wikilink")