![](Kaschmirschal_1.jpg "fig:Kaschmirschal_1.jpg") **Cashmere wool**,
usually simply known as **cashmere**, is a [fiber](fiber "wikilink")
obtained from [cashmere goats](cashmere_goat "wikilink") or
[pashmina](Pashmina_goat "wikilink") goats and other types of
[goat](goat "wikilink"). It has been used to make yarn, textiles and
clothing for hundreds of years. The word *cashmere* is an anglicisation
of *[Kashmir](Kashmir "wikilink")*. Common usage defines the fiber as
[wool](wool "wikilink"), but it is finer, stronger, lighter, softer and
approximately three times more insulating than [sheep](sheep "wikilink")
wool.[1] Both the soft undercoat and the guard hairs may be used; the
softer hair is reserved for textiles, while the coarse guard hair is
used for brushes and other non-apparel purposes.

A number of countries produce cashmere and have improved processing
techniques over the years, but China and Mongolia are two of the leading
producers as of 2019.

High demand for the valuable fiber has resulted in the decimation and
transformation of grasslands into deserts in Asia, increasing local
temperatures and causing air pollution which has traveled to the
Americas. Also, some yarns and clothing marketed as containing cashmere
have been found to contain little to no cashmere fiber, so more
stringent testing has been requested to make sure items are fairly
represented.

## Sources

![](Pashmina_goats.jpg "fig:Pashmina_goats.jpg")s,
[Ladakh](Ladakh "wikilink"), [India](India "wikilink")\]\] Cashmere wool
fiber for clothing and other textile articles is obtained from the neck
region of Cashmere and other goats. Historically, fine-haired Cashmere
goats have been called *Capra hircus laniger*, as if they were a
subspecies of the domestic goat *Capra hircus*. However, they are now
more commonly considered part of the domestic goat subspecies *Capra
aegagrus hircus* or the alternate version *Hircus Blythi Goat*.[2]
Cashmere goats produce a double [fleece](Wool "wikilink") that consists
of a fine, soft undercoat or underdown of hair mingled with a straighter
and much coarser outer coating of hair called [guard
hair](guard_hair "wikilink"). For the fine underdown to be sold and
processed further, it must be de-haired. De-hairing is a mechanical
process that separates the coarse hairs from the fine hair. After
de-hairing, the resulting "cashmere" is ready to be dyed and converted
into textile yarn, fabrics and garments.

## Gathering

![](cashmeregoat_shearing.png "fig:cashmeregoat_shearing.png"),
Australia.\]\] Cashmere wool is collected during the spring
[moulting](moulting "wikilink") season when the goats naturally shed
their winter coat. In the [Northern
Hemisphere](Northern_Hemisphere "wikilink"), the goats moult as early as
March and as late as May.

In some regions, the mixed mass of down and coarse hair is removed by
hand with a coarse comb that pulls tufts of fiber from the animal as the
comb is raked through the fleece. The collected fiber then has a higher
yield of pure cashmere after the fiber has been washed and dehaired. The
long, coarse guard hair is then typically clipped from the animal and is
often used for brushes, [interfacings](interfacing "wikilink") and other
non-apparel uses. Animals in [Iran](Iran "wikilink"),
[Afghanistan](Afghanistan "wikilink"), [New
Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink"), and
[Australia](Australian_Cashmere_goat "wikilink") are typically
[shorn](shorn "wikilink") of their fleece, resulting in a higher coarse
hair content and lower pure cashmere yield. In America, the most popular
method is combing. The process takes up to two weeks, but with a trained
eye for when the fiber is releasing, it is possible to comb the fibers
out in about a week. The term "baby cashmere" is used for fibres
harvested from younger goats, and has a reputation of being softer.

## Production

![](Shawl_makers_in_Kashmir_(1867).jpg "fig:Shawl_makers_in_Kashmir_(1867).jpg")
painting depicting men manufacturing [shawls](shawl "wikilink") using
pashm wool\]\]

[China](China "wikilink") has become the largest producer of raw
cashmere, estimated at 19,200 metric tons (in hair) per year(2016).
[Mongolia](Mongolia "wikilink") follows with 8,900 tons (in hair) as of
2016,[3] while [Afghanistan](Afghanistan "wikilink"),
[Iran](Iran "wikilink"), [Turkey](Turkey "wikilink"),
[Kyrgyzstan](Kyrgyzstan "wikilink")[4] and other Central Asian republics
produce lesser amounts. The annual world clip is estimated to be between
15,000 and 20,000 tons (13,605 and 18,140 tonnes) (in hair). Pure
cashmere, resulting from removing animal grease, dirt and coarse hairs
from the fleece, is estimated at about 6,500 tons (5,895 tonnes).
Ultra-fine Cashmere or [Pashmina](Pashmina "wikilink") is still produced
by communities in [Kashmir](Kashmir "wikilink") but its rarity and high
price, along with political instability in the region, make it very hard
to source and to regulate quality. It is estimated that on average
yearly production per goat is .

Pure cashmere can be dyed and spun into yarns and
[knitted](knitted "wikilink") into [jumpers](Sweater "wikilink")
(sweaters), [hats](hat "wikilink"), [gloves](glove "wikilink"),
[socks](sock "wikilink") and other clothing, or woven into
[fabrics](fabric "wikilink") then cut and assembled into garments such
as outer [coats](coat_(clothing) "wikilink"),
[jackets](jacket "wikilink"), [trousers](trousers "wikilink") (pants),
[pajamas](pajamas "wikilink"), [scarves](scarf "wikilink"),
[blankets](blanket "wikilink"), and other items. Fabric and garment
producers in [Scotland](Scotland "wikilink"), [Italy](Italy "wikilink"),
and [Japan](Japan "wikilink") have long been known as market leaders.
Cashmere may also be blended with other fibers to bring the garment cost
down, or to gain their properties, such as elasticity from wool, or
sheen from silk.

The town of [Uxbridge,
Massachusetts](Uxbridge,_Massachusetts "wikilink") in the [United
States](United_States "wikilink") was an incubator for the cashmere wool
industry. It had the first power looms for woolens and the first
manufacture of "[satinets](satinet "wikilink")". Capron Mill had the
first power looms, in 1820. It burned on July 21, 2007, in the [Bernat
Mill](Bernat_Mill "wikilink") fire.

In the United States, under the U.S. Wool Products Labeling Act of 1939,
as amended, (15 U. S. Code Section 68b(a)(6)), a wool or textile product
may be labelled as containing cashmere only if the following criteria
are met:

-   such wool product is the fine (dehaired)
    [undercoat](down_hair "wikilink") fibers produced by a cashmere goat
    (*Capra hircus laniger*);
-   the average [diameter](diameter "wikilink") of the fiber of such
    wool product does not exceed 19 [microns](micron "wikilink"); and
-   such wool product does not contain more than 3 percent (by weight)
    of cashmere fibers with average diameters that exceed 30 microns.
-   The average fiber diameter may be subject to a [coefficient of
    variation](coefficient_of_variation "wikilink") around the
    [mean](mean_(average) "wikilink") that shall not exceed 24
    percent.[5]

## Types of fiber

-   Raw – fiber that has not been processed and is essentially straight
    from the animal
-   Processed – fiber that has been through the processes of de-hairing,
    washing, carding, and is ready either to spin or to
    knit/crochet/weave
-   Virgin – new fiber made into yarns, fabrics, or garments for the
    first time
-   Recycled – fibers reclaimed from scraps or fabrics that were
    previously woven or felted, and may or may not have been previously
    used by the consumer from various parts of the world.

## History

![](Boy's_Frock_LACMA_M.2007.211.88_(1_of_10).jpg "fig:Boy's_Frock_LACMA_M.2007.211.88_(1_of_10).jpg")
produced circa 1855 in [Kashmir](Kashmir "wikilink"); cashmere wool
[twill](twill "wikilink") with silk embroidery and silk tassels.\]\]

Cashmere has been manufactured in [Mongolia](Mongolia "wikilink"),
[Nepal](Nepal "wikilink") and [Kashmir](Kashmir "wikilink") for
thousands of years. The fiber is also known as *pashm*
([Persian](Persian_language "wikilink") for *wool*) or
*[pashmina](pashmina "wikilink")* (Persian/Urdu word derived from Pashm)
for its use in the handmade shawls of Kashmir.[6] References to woolen
shawls appear in texts surviving from between the 3rd century BC and the
11th century AD.[7] However, a popular notion in Kashmir is that it was
the 15th-century ruler of Kashmir,
[Zain-ul-Abidin](Zain-ul-Abidin "wikilink"), who founded the local wool
industry by bringing weavers from [Turkestan](Turkestan "wikilink").[8]
Another local tradition sees the founder of all Kashmiri crafts in the
famous 14th century saint [Mir Sayyid Ali
Hamadani](Mir_Sayyid_Ali_Hamadani "wikilink") who, tradition goes,
brought 700 craftsmen from Persia to Kashmir.[9] When Ali Hamadani
visited [Ladakh](Ladakh "wikilink") he discovered for the first time in
history the warmth and fineness of ladakhi goat wool.[10] He combed some
goat wool and made a pair of socks with his own hands. Afterwards he
gifted those socks to the king of Kashmir, Sultan Qutubdin (1374-89
AD).[11] Sultan was amazed by their durability and fineness.[12] Ali
Hamadani brought some raw goat wool from Ladakh and suggested the king
to start [shawl](shawl "wikilink") weaving in Kashmir. That was the
starting point of the usage of the cashmere wool.

Trading in commercial quantities of raw cashmere between Asia and Europe
began with Valerie Audresset SA, Louviers, France, claiming to be the
first European company to commercially spin cashmere.[13] The down was
imported from Tibet through [Kazan](Kazan "wikilink"), the capital of
the Russian province of [Volga](Volga "wikilink"), and was used in
France to create imitation woven shawls. Unlike the Kashmir shawls, the
French shawls had a different pattern on each side.[14] The imported
cashmere was spread out on large sieves and beaten with sticks to open
the fibers and clear away the dirt. After opening, the cashmere was
washed and children removed the coarse hair. The down was then carded
and combed using the same methods used for [worsted](worsted "wikilink")
spinning.[15][16]

In the 18th and early 19th centuries, Kashmir (then called cashmere by
the British) had a thriving industry producing shawls from goat down
imported from Tibet and Tartary through Ladakh. The down trade was
controlled by treaties signed as a result of previous wars[17] The
Shawls were introduced into western Europe when the General in Chief of
the French campaign in Egypt (1799-1802) sent one to Paris. The shawl's
arrival is said to have created an immediate sensation and plans were
put in place to start manufacturing the product in France.[18]

In 1799 at his factory in Reims, [William-Louis
Ternaux](William-Louis_Ternaux "wikilink"), the leading woolens
manufacturer in France under Napoleon, began to produce imitation India
shawls (*cachemires*) using the wool of Spanish merino sheep. By 1811,
with government assistance, Ternaux also began experimenting with the
production of real India shawls using what he called *laine de Perse*,
i.e., the down (*duvet*) of Tibetan-cashmere goats.[19] In 1818, Ternaux
resolved to help establish herds of cashmere goats in France. A famous
expedition to Persia was organized, led by the orientalist and diplomat
[Pierre Amédée Jaubert](Pierre_Amédée_Jaubert "wikilink"), to be
financed in part by the French government. Of the acquired herd of 1,500
animals, only 256 arrived safely in the spring of 1819 at Marseilles and
Toulon via the Crimea. About 100 of the cashmere goats were then
purchased by the French government (at 2,000 francs each) and sent to
the royal sheep farm at Perpignan. The remainder, about 180 including
new-borns, went to Ternaux's property at
[Saint-Ouen](Saint-Ouen-sur-Seine "wikilink") outside Paris.[20]
Although Ternaux had little success getting small farmers to add
cashmeres to their sheep herds, a few wealthy landowners were willing to
experiment with the goats. For example, Ternaux’s herd was seen in 1823
by C.T.Tower of Weald Hall, Essex, England. Tower purchased two female
and two male goats and took them back to England, where in 1828 he was
awarded a gold medal by the Society for the Encouragement of Arts,
Manufactures and Commerce for rearing a herd of cashmeres. Also, a few
of Ternaux's goats were purchased for a model farm at Grignon, near
[Versailles](Versailles "wikilink"), run by M. Polonceau. Polonceau
crossbred the cashmeres with Angora goats to improve the down for
spinning and weaving. This Cashmere-Angora herd was seen by William
Riley of New South Wales in 1828, and again in 1831 when Riley purchased
thirteen of the goats for trans-shipment to Australia. At the time, the
average production of the Polonceau herd was 16 ounces (500 grams) of
down. Ternaux's herd at St. Ouen still numbered 150 when the famous
industrialist died in 1833. The herd at Perpignan died out by
1829.[21][22][23]

By 1830, weaving cashmere shawls with French-produced yarn had become an
important Scottish industry. The Scottish Board of Trustees for the
Encouragement of Arts and Manufactures offered a 300 [pound
sterling](pound_sterling "wikilink") reward to the first person who
could spin cashmere in Scotland based on the French system. Captain
Charles Stuart Cochrane collected the required information while in
Paris and received a Scottish patent for the process in 1831. In the
autumn of 1831, he sold the patent to Henry Houldsworth and sons of
Glasgow. In 1832 Henry Houldsworth and sons commenced the manufacture of
yarn, and in 1833 received the reward.[24]

Dawson International claim to have invented the first commercial
dehairing machine in 1890, and from 1906 they purchased cashmere from
China, but were restricted to purchasing fiber from Beijing and Tianjin
until 1978. In 1978 trade was liberalised and Dawson International began
buying cashmere from many provinces.[25]

Many early textile centers developed as part of the American Industrial
Revolution. Among them, the [Blackstone
Valley](Blackstone_Valley "wikilink") became a major contributor to the
American Industrial Revolution. The town of [Uxbridge,
Massachusetts](Uxbridge,_Massachusetts "wikilink") became an early
textile center in the Blackstone Valley, which was known for the
manufacture of cashmere wool and satinets.

Austrian Textile Manufacturer [Bernhard
Altmann](Bernhard_Altmann "wikilink") is credited with bringing cashmere
to the United States of America on a mass scale beginning in 1947.[26]

## Criticism

Due to the way the goats destroy the plants they eat, by pulling them up
by the roots rather than grazing the tops, as well as having sharp
hooves that pierce the grounds they tread, the high demand for cashmere
is causing [grasslands](grasslands "wikilink") in China and Mongolia to
disappear, air pollution to increase, and the herds to starve.[27]
Factories in Alashan are forced to close several days a week due to
water rationing as the deserts there expand 400 miles a year. As of
2016, the degradation of 65% of the grasslands in the area has been
linked to a four-degree Fahrenheit increase in the temperature of
Mongolia, three degrees higher than temperatures in other areas of the
world. With proper management, the grasslands could recover in the space
of ten years. Mitigation efforts include changing trades, grazing bans,
hand-feeding the goats, and attempting to convince Mongolian herders to
raise [yaks](yaks "wikilink") or [camels](camels "wikilink") instead of
or in addition to fewer goats, as the hair from these animals is also
valuable and their impact on grasslands is less.[28][29]

Air pollution caused by the combination of heavy coal use creating
atmospheric particulates and the desert dust storms in China and
Mongolia crosses the Pacific Ocean to the Americas. Health officials in
Canada, China, Mongolia, and the US have had to issue air quality
warnings to the public.[30]

The demand for the fiber has caused some vendors, both knowingly and
not, to sell yarns or textiles containing little to no cashmere[31]
representing themselves as being composed of cashmere. Wool and other
fibers have been mixed in by unscrupulous manufacturers, deliberately
selling mislabeled items to well-known department stores. Complaints of
mislabeling after testing for cashmere content were reported by the
Cashmere and Camel Hair Manufacturers Institute to the [Federal Trade
Commission](Federal_Trade_Commission "wikilink"), leading to more
stringent examination of cashmere products.[32]

## See also

-   [Cameline](Cameline "wikilink")
-   [Pashmina](Pashmina "wikilink")
-   [Shahtoosh](Shahtoosh "wikilink")
-   [International Year of Natural
    Fibres](International_Year_of_Natural_Fibres "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Cashmere is Scottish (1973)](http://ssa.nls.uk/film.cfm?fid=0578),
    an archive film featuring [Joanna Lumley](Joanna_Lumley "wikilink").
    From the [Scottish Screen
    Archive](Scottish_Screen#The_Archive "wikilink") at [National
    Library of Scotland](National_Library_of_Scotland "wikilink")

[Cashmere](Category:Cashmere "wikilink") [Category:Economy of Jammu and
Kashmir](Category:Economy_of_Jammu_and_Kashmir "wikilink")

[1] Von Bergen, 1963

[2]

[3] National Statistical Office of Mongolia, 2015, <http://nso.mn>

[4]

[5]

[6] Encyclopædia Britannica (2008). *cashmere*.

[7] Encyclopædia Britannica (2008). *kashmir shawl*.

[8]

[9] Sheraza Number (2004). Kashmir Academy Arts and Culture.(ed.),
Jeelani Allaie

[10]

[11] Rafiabadi, Hamid Naseem (2005). *Saints and Saviours of Islam*.
Sarup & Sons. .

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15] Newton, W. (1836). *The London Journal of Arts and Sciences and
Repertory of Arts And Sciences and Repertory of Patent Inventions*.
p.423.

[16] Gilroy, Clinton G. (1844). *The Art of Weaving, by Hand and by
Power, With an Introductory Account of Its Rise and Progress in Ancient
and Modern Times*. New York: George D. Baldwin. pp. 270-71.

[17] Bell, James (1829). *A System of Geography Popular and Scientific
or a Physical, Political and Statistical Account of the World and Its
Various Divisions*. London.

[18] "Cashmere", *The New American Cyclopedia*, IV (1861), p.514.

[19] Ternaux, William (1819). "Notice sur l'importation en France des
chèvres à laine de cachemire, originaires du Thibet", *Bulletin de la
société pour l'industrie,* XVIII.

[20] Ternaux, William (1822). *Recueil des pièces sur l'importation et
naturalisation en France par MM. Ternaux et Jaubert des chèvres de race
thibetaine, ou chèvres à duvet de Cachemire*. Paris.

[21] Southey, Thomas (1851). *The Rise, Progress and Present State of
Colonial Sheep & Wools*. London: Effingham Wilson.

[22] "On the Cashmere-Angora Shawl Goat", in *American Journal of
Science and Art*, vol 25 (January 1834)

[23] "Cashmere Shawls, Part II", *Saturday Magazine*, Vol 19 (London
1841), 13-14.

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]