---
title: Charmeuse
permalink: /Charmeuse/
---

**Charmeuse** () is a lightweight [fabric](/fabric "wikilink") woven
with a [satin weave](/satin_weave "wikilink"), in which the
[warp](/Warp_(weaving) "wikilink") threads cross over four or more of
the backing ([weft](/weft "wikilink")) threads. These float threads give
the front of the fabric a smooth, reflective finish, whereas the back
has a dull finish. It can be made of silk or a synthetic lookalike such
as polyester. Silk charmeuse is more expensive and delicate but is
softer and a better insulator.[1] [Polyester](/Polyester "wikilink")
charmeuse is cheaper and can often withstand machine washing, but it
does not breathe as well as silk. Charmeuse differs from plain
[satin](/satin "wikilink") in that charmeuse has a different ratio of
float (face) threads.

The luster and delicate hand make charmeuse suited to
[lingerie](/lingerie "wikilink"), flowing evening gowns, and draped
blouses. Bridal gowns sometimes use charmeuse; however, the fabric does
not hold a shape well, so it is not used for full, flared skirts; the
charmeuse tends to cling and hang against the body. It is best suited to
a more fluid, slinky [bias](/bias_(textile) "wikilink") cut, and drapes
well.

Its uses in menswear include the lining of [jackets](/jacket "wikilink")
and [slacks](/slacks "wikilink"),
[handkerchiefs](/handkerchief "wikilink"), [ties](/neck_tie "wikilink"),
and underwear such as charmeuse [boxer
shorts](/boxer_shorts "wikilink").

When woven from polyester it can be a challenging fabric to sew; it
tends to be slippery and may be difficult to control through the presser
foot of a [sewing machine](/sewing_machine "wikilink"). Seams have a
tendency to pucker and pull; a smaller stitch length and properly
balanced tensions can minimize this, though the experience of the sewer
will affect the finished result as well. Pins can make holes and marks
in polyester charmeuse so it is very important to use proper, sharp
dressmaker's pins with a smooth, not abrupt, taper to the point. For
greater ease of sewing, a sizing product can be sprayed on before
cutting and washed out after the garment is completed.

The look of satin is prized for dressy garments, especially when cut on
the bias, since it flows well on the body and catches light in stunning
patterns.

## References

[Category:Woven fabrics](/Category:Woven_fabrics "wikilink")

[1]