![](Coir_fibery.jpg "fig:Coir_fibery.jpg")
![](Coir_segregation.jpg "fig:Coir_segregation.jpg") **Coir** (), or
**coconut fibre**, is a [natural
fibre](Natural_fiber#Vegetable_fibers "wikilink") extracted from the
[husk](husk "wikilink") of [coconut](coconut "wikilink")[1] and used in
products such as floor mats, doormats, brushes and mattresses. Coir is
the fibrous material found between the hard, internal shell and the
outer coat of a coconut. Other uses of brown coir (made from ripe
coconut) are in upholstery padding, sacking and horticulture. White
coir, harvested from unripe coconuts, is used for making finer brushes,
string, rope and fishing nets.[2] It has the advantage of not sinking,
so can be used in long lengths on deep water without the added weight
dragging down boats and buoys.

## History

The name coir comes from *kayar*, a
[Dravidian](Dravidian_languages "wikilink") word for cord, used
[Tamil](Tamil_language "wikilink"), with neither language clearly proven
to be the origin.[3][4] [Ropes](Rope "wikilink") and cordage have been
made from coconut fibre since ancient times. Indian navigators who
sailed the seas to Malaya, Java, China, and the Gulf of Arabia centuries
ago used coir for their ship ropes. Arab writers of the 11th century AD
referred to the extensive use of coir for ship ropes and
[rigging](rigging "wikilink").[5]

A coir industry in the UK was recorded before the second half of the
19th century. During 1840, Captain Widely, in co-operation with Captain
Logan and Mr. Thomas Treloar,[6] founded the known carpet firms of
Treloar and Sons in Ludgate Hill, England, for the manufacture of coir
into various fabrics suitable for floor coverings.[7]

## Structure

![](Textielmuseum-cabinet-10.jpg "fig:Textielmuseum-cabinet-10.jpg")
Coir fibres are found between the hard, internal shell and the outer
coat of a [coconut](coconut "wikilink"). The individual fibre cells are
narrow and hollow, with thick walls made of
[cellulose](cellulose "wikilink"). They are pale when immature, but
later become hardened and yellowed as a layer of
[lignin](lignin "wikilink") is deposited on their walls. Each cell is
about long and in diameter.[8] Fibres are typically long.[9] The two
varieties of coir are brown and white. Brown coir harvested from fully
ripened coconuts is thick, strong and has high abrasion resistance. It
is typically used in mats, brushes and sacking. Mature brown coir fibres
contain more lignin and less cellulose than fibres such as
[flax](flax "wikilink") and [cotton](cotton "wikilink"), so are stronger
but less flexible. White coir fibres harvested from coconuts before they
are ripe are white or light brown in color and are smoother and finer,
but also weaker. They are generally spun to make yarn used in mats or
rope.

The coir fibre is relatively waterproof, and is one of the few natural
fibres resistant to damage by saltwater. Fresh water is used to process
brown coir, while seawater and fresh water are both used in the
production of white coir. It must not be confused with coir pith, or
formerly cocopeat, which is the powdery material resulting from the
processing of the coir fibre. Coir fibre is locally named 'coprah' in
some countries, adding to confusion.[10]

## Processing

Green coconuts, harvested after about six to 12 months on the palm,
contain pliable white fibres. Brown fibre is obtained by harvesting
fully mature coconuts when the nutritious layer surrounding the seed is
ready to be processed into [copra](copra "wikilink") and desiccated
coconut. The fibrous layer of the fruit is then separated from the hard
shell (manually) by driving the fruit down onto a spike to split it
(dehusking). A well-seasoned husker can manually separate 2,000 coconuts
per day. Machines are now available which crush the whole fruit to give
the loose fibres. These machines can process up to 2,000 coconuts per
hour.

### Brown fibre

The fibrous husks are soaked in pits or in nets in a slow-moving body of
water to swell and soften the fibres. The long bristle fibres are
separated from the shorter mattress fibres underneath the skin of the
nut, a process known as wet-milling. The mattress fibres are sifted to
remove dirt and other rubbish, dried in the sun and packed into bales.
Some mattress fibre is allowed to retain more moisture so it retains its
elasticity for twisted fibre production. The coir fibre is elastic
enough to twist without breaking and it holds a curl as though
permanently waved. Twisting is done by simply making a rope of the hank
of fibre and twisting it using a machine or by hand. The longer bristle
fibre is washed in clean water and then dried before being tied into
bundles or hanks. It may then be cleaned and 'hackled' by steel combs to
straighten the fibres and remove any shorter fibre pieces. Coir bristle
fibre can also be bleached and dyed to obtain hanks of different
colours.

### White fibre

The immature husks are suspended in a river or water-filled pit for up
to ten months. During this time,
[micro-organisms](micro-organisms "wikilink") break down the plant
tissues surrounding the fibres to loosen them â€” a process known as
[retting](retting "wikilink"). The Segments of the husk are then beaten
with iron rods to separate out the long fibres which are subsequently
dried and cleaned. Cleaned fibre is ready for spinning into yarn using a
simple one-handed system or a spinning wheel.

Researchers at
[CSIR](Council_of_Scientific_and_Industrial_Research "wikilink")'s
National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology in
Thiruvananthapuram have developed a biological process for the
extraction of coir fibre from coconut husk without polluting the
environment. The technology uses enzymes to separate the fibres by
converting and solubilizing plant compounds to curb the pollution of
waters caused by retting of husks.[11]

### Buffering

Because coir pith is high in sodium and potassium, it is treated before
use as a growth medium for plants or fungi by soaking in a calcium
buffering solution; most coir sold for growing purposes is said to be
pre-treated.[12] Once any remaining salts have been leached out of the
coir pith, it and the cocochips become suitable substrates for
cultivating fungi. Coir is naturally rich in potassium, which can lead
to magnesium and calcium deficiencies in soilless horticultural media.
Coir fiber is rarely used as a potting material, except for orchids, and
does not need buffering, as it has a very low [cation-exchange
capacity](cation-exchange_capacity "wikilink") (CEC) capacity, hence not
retaining salts.

Coir does provide a suitable substrate for horticultural use as a
soilless potting medium. The material's high lignin content is
longer-lasting, holds more water, and does not shrink off the sides of
the pot when dry allowing for easier rewetting. This light media has
advantages and disadvantages that can be corrected with the addition of
the proper amendment such as coarse sand for weight in interior plants
like Draceana. Nutritive amendments should also be considered. Calcium
and magnesium will be lacking in coir potting mixes, so a naturally good
source of these nutrients is dolomitic lime which contains both. pH is
of utmost importance as coir pith tends to have a high pH after some
months of use, resulting in plant stunting and multiple deficiencies.
Coir has as well the disadvantage of being extremely sensitive to the
Leucocoprinus greenhouse fungus. The addition of beneficial microbes to
the coir media have been successful in tropical green house conditions
and interior spaces as well. However, it is important to note that the
microbes will engage in growth and reproduction under moist atmospheres
producing fruiting bodies (mushrooms).

### Bristle coir

**Bristle coir** is the longest variety of coir fibre. It is
manufactured from [retted](retting "wikilink") [coconut
husks](coconut "wikilink") through a process called defibring. The coir
fibre thus extracted is then combed using steel combs to make the fibre
clean and to remove short fibres. Bristle coir fibre is used as bristles
in brushes for domestic and industrial applications.

## Uses

### Cordage, packaging, bedding, flooring, and others

![](Making_coir_rope_in_Kerala.JPG "fig:Making_coir_rope_in_Kerala.JPG")
in [Kerala](Kerala "wikilink"), [India](India "wikilink")\]\] Red coir
is used in floor mats and [doormats](mat "wikilink"),
[brushes](brush "wikilink"), [mattresses](mattress "wikilink"), floor
tiles and sacking. A small amount is also made into
[twine](twine "wikilink"). Pads of curled brown coir fibre, made by
needle-felting (a machine technique that mats the fibres together), are
shaped and cut to fill mattresses and for use in erosion control on
river banks and hillsides. A major proportion of brown coir pads are
sprayed with rubber [latex](latex "wikilink") which bonds the fibres
together (rubberised coir) to be used as upholstery padding for the
automobile industry in Europe. The material is also used for
[insulation](Thermal_insulation "wikilink") and packaging.

The major use of white coir is in [rope](rope "wikilink") manufacture.
Mats of woven coir fibre are made from the finer grades of bristle and
white fibre using hand or mechanical looms. White coir also is used to
make fishing nets due to its strong resistance to saltwater.

### Agricultural and horticultural uses

In [agriculture](agriculture "wikilink") and
[horticulture](horticulture "wikilink"), coir is a substitute for
[sphagnum](sphagnum "wikilink") (peat moss) and [peat](peat "wikilink")
because it is widely available and environmentally friendly. Many
sources of coir however are heavily contaminated with pathogenic fungi,
and the choice of the source is important. Coir is also useful to deter
[snails](snail "wikilink") from delicate plantings, and as a growing
medium in intensive glasshouse (greenhouse) horticulture.[13]

Coconut coir from Mexico has been found to contain large numbers of
colonies of the beneficial fungus *[Aspergillus
terreus](Aspergillus_terreus "wikilink")*, which acts as a biological
control against plant pathogenic fungi.[14]

Coir is also used as a [substrate](Substrate_(biology) "wikilink") to
grow mushrooms. The coir is usually mixed with
[vermiculite](vermiculite "wikilink") and pasteurised with boiling
water. After the coir/vermiculite mix has cooled to room temperature, it
is placed in a larger container, usually a plastic box. Previously
prepared spawn jars are then added, spawn is usually grown in jars using
substrates such as rye grains or wild bird seed. This spawn is the
mushrooms [mycelium](mycelium "wikilink") and will colonize the
coir/vermiculite mix eventually fruiting mushrooms.

Coir is an [allergen](allergen "wikilink"), as well as the latex and
other materials used frequently in the treatment of coir.[15]

Coir can be used as a terrarium substrate for reptiles or
arachnids.[16][17]

Coir fibre pith or coir dust can hold large quantities of water, just
like a sponge.[18] It is used as a replacement for traditional peat in
soil mixtures, or, as a soil-less substrate for plant cultivation.[19]
It has been called "coco peat" because it is to fresh coco fibre
somewhat like what peat is to peat moss, although it is not true peat.

Coir waste from coir fibre industries is washed, heat-treated, screened
and graded before being processed into coco peat products of various
granularity and denseness, which are then used for horticultural and
agricultural applications and as industrial absorbent.

Usually shipped in the form of compressed bales, briquettes, slabs or
discs, the end user usually expands and aerates the compressed coco peat
by the addition of water. A single kilogramme of dry coco peat will
expand to 15 litres of moist coco peat.

Coco peat is used as a [soil conditioner](soil_conditioner "wikilink").
Due to low levels of nutrients in its composition, coco peat is usually
not the sole component in the medium used to grow plants. When plants
are grown exclusively in coco peat, it is important to add nutrients
according to the specific plants' needs. Coco peat from
[Philippines](Philippines "wikilink"), [Sri Lanka](Sri_Lanka "wikilink")
and [India](India "wikilink") contains several macro- and micro-plant
nutrients, including substantial quantities of
[potassium](potassium "wikilink"). This extra potassium can interfere
with magnesium availability. Adding extra magnesium through the addition
of [magnesium sulphates](magnesium_sulphate "wikilink") can correct this
issue.

Some coco peat is not fully decomposed when it arrives and will use up
available nitrogen as it does so (known as drawdown), competing with the
plant if there is not enough. This is called nitrogen robbery; it can
cause [nitrogen deficiency](nitrogen_deficiency "wikilink") in the
plants. Poorly sourced coco fibre can have excess salts in it and needs
washing (check electrical conductivity of run-off water, flush if high).
It holds water well and holds around 1000 times more air than soil.
Adding slow release fertilizers or organic fertilizers are highly
advised when growing with coco fibre.

Common uses of coco fibre include:

-   As a substitute for peat, because it is free of bacteria and most
    fungal spores, and is [sustainably
    produced](sustainability "wikilink") without the environmental
    damage caused by peat mining.
-   Mixed with sand, compost and fertilizer to make good quality
    [potting soil](potting_soil "wikilink"). Coco peat generally has an
    acidity in the range of pH - 5.5 to 6.5, which is slightly too
    acidic for some plants, but many popular plants can tolerate this pH
    range.
-   As substrate for growing [mushrooms](mushrooms "wikilink"), which
    thrive on the cellulose. Coco peat has high
    [cellulose](cellulose "wikilink") and [lignin](lignin "wikilink")
    content.

Coco fibre can be re-used up to three times with little loss of yield.
Coco fibre from diseased plants should not be re-used.

### Other Uses

Oil and Fluid Absorption

Due to its superior absorption capabilities when compared to products
made of clay, silica and diatomaceous earth-based absorbents, dry
coconut coir pith is gaining popularity as an oil and fluid absorbent.
Many other absorbents have to be mined, whereas coconut coir pith is a
waste product in abundance in countries where coconut is a major
agriculture product.

Animal Bedding

Coconut coir pith is also used as a bedding in litter boxes, animal
farms and pet houses to absorb animal waste.

## Biosecurity risks

Coco fibre can harbour organisms that pose a threat to the
[biosecurity](biosecurity "wikilink") of countries into which it is
imported. Coco peat has been imported into [New
Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink") since about 1989 with a marked increase
since 2004. By 2009 a total of 25 new weed species have been found in
imported coco peat. The regulations relating to importing coco peat into
New Zealand have been amended to improve the biosecurity measures.[20]

*[Trichoderma](Trichoderma "wikilink")* is a naturally occurring fungus
in coco peat; it works in symbiosis with plant roots to protect them
from pathogenic fungi such as *[Pythium](Pythium "wikilink")*. It is not
present in sterilised coco peat.

## Major producers

Total world coir fibre production is This industry is particularly
important in some areas of the developing world. India, mainly in
[Pollachi](Pollachi "wikilink") and the coastal region of
[Kerala](Kerala "wikilink") State, produces 60% of the total world
supply of white coir fibre. [Sri Lanka](Sri_Lanka "wikilink") produces
36% of the total brown fibre output. Over 50% of the coir fibre produced
annually throughout the world is consumed in the countries of origin,
mainly India. Together, India and Sri Lanka produce 90% of the coir
produced every year.[21] Sri Lanka remains the world's largest exporter
of coir fibre and coir fibre based products.

## See also

-   [Coir Board of India](Coir_Board_of_India "wikilink")
-   [Fiber rope](Fiber_rope "wikilink")
-   [International Year of Natural
    Fibres](International_Year_of_Natural_Fibres "wikilink") 2009
-   [Coconut production in
    Kerala](Coconut_production_in_Kerala "wikilink")
-   [Natural rope](Natural_rope "wikilink")

## References

Prabhu, S. R., & Thomas, G. V. (2002). Biological conversion of coir
pith into a value-added organic resource and its application in
Agri-Horticulture: Current status, prospects and perspective. Journal of
Plantation Crops, 30(1), 1-17.

## External links

-

[Category:Coconuts](Category:Coconuts "wikilink") [Category:Fiber
plants](Category:Fiber_plants "wikilink") [Category:Horticulture and
gardening](Category:Horticulture_and_gardening "wikilink")
[Category:Malayalam terms](Category:Malayalam_terms "wikilink")
[Category:Non-food crops](Category:Non-food_crops "wikilink")

[1]

[2] [How coir is made - material, making, history, used, processing,
product, industry, machine,
History](http://www.madehow.com/Volume-6/Coir.html)

[3] Origin and meaning of coir by Online Etymology
Dictionary\|url=<https://www.etymonline.com/word/coir%7Cwebsite=www.etymonline.com%7Caccessdate=20>
April 2018\|language=en}}

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10] "

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14] Hyder, Naveen; Sims, James J.; Wegulo, Stephen N.. In Vitro
Suppression of Soilborne Plant Pathogens by Coir. Department of Plant
Pathology, University of Nebraska, 448 Plant Science Hall, Lincoln, NE
68583. 2008-11-19.
URL:<http://www.agrococo.com/Pathogen_Suppression.pdf> . Accessed:
2009-08-17. (Archived by WebCite at)

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]