![](Sherbrooke,_Canada_(Unsplash_S2sWHoVZF8s)_(cut).jpg "fig:Sherbrooke,_Canada_(Unsplash_S2sWHoVZF8s)_(cut).jpg")"
trimming (Canada, 2017)\]\] ![](Nutriajacke.jpg "fig:Nutriajacke.jpg")
jacket, reversible (2008)\]\]
![](Canadian_man_fur_coat_1910.jpeg "fig:Canadian_man_fur_coat_1910.jpeg")

**Fur clothing** is [clothing](clothing "wikilink") made of
[furry](fur "wikilink") animal [hides](hide_(skin) "wikilink"). Fur is
one of the oldest forms of clothing, and is thought to have been widely
used as hominids first expanded outside Africa. Some view fur as
luxurious and warm; however, others reject it due to moral concerns for
[animal rights](animal_rights "wikilink"). The term 'fur' is often used
to refer to a coat, wrap, or shawl made from the fur of animals.
Controversy exists regarding the wearing of fur coats, due to animal
cruelty concerns. The most popular kinds of fur in the 1960s (known as
the luxury fur) were blond mink, silver striped fox and red fox. Cheaper
alternatives were pelts of wolf, Persian lamb or muskrat. It was common
for ladies to wear a matching hat. However, in the 1950s, a 'must have'
type of fur was the mutation fur (naturally nuanced colours) and fur
trimmings on a coat that were beaver, lamb fur, Astrakhan and mink.

## History

![](Lagerraum_von_Lomer_&_Co_(vor_1906).jpg "fig:Lagerraum_von_Lomer_&_Co_(vor_1906).jpg")
![](Fur_sewing_machine.jpg "fig:Fur_sewing_machine.jpg")\]\] Fur is
generally thought to have been among the first materials used for
clothing and bodily decoration. The exact date when fur was first used
in [clothing](clothes "wikilink") is debated. It is known that several
species of [hominoids](hominoids "wikilink") including *[Homo
sapiens](Homo_sapiens "wikilink")* and *[Homo
neanderthalensis](Homo_neanderthalensis "wikilink")* used fur clothing.

Fur clothing predates written history and has been recovered from
various archaeological sites worldwide. Crown proclamations known as
“sumptuary legislation” were issued in England[1] limiting the wearing
of certain furs to the higher social statuses, thereby establishing a
[cachet](cachet "wikilink") based on exclusivity. Furs such as
[marten](marten "wikilink"), [grey squirrel](Gray_squirrel "wikilink")
and [ermine](ermine "wikilink") were reserved for the aristocracy, while
fox, hare and beaver clothed the middle, and [goat](goat "wikilink"),
[wolf](Gray_wolf "wikilink") and [sheepskin](sheepskin "wikilink") the
lower. Fur was primarily used for visible linings, with species varied
by season within social classes. Furbearing animals decreased in [West
Europe](Western_Europe "wikilink") and began to be imported from the
Middle East and Russia.[2]

As new kinds of fur entered Europe, other uses were made with fur other
than clothing. [Beaver](Beaver "wikilink") was most desired but used to
make hats which became a popular headpiece especially during the
wartime. Swedish soldiers wore broad-brimmed hats made exclusively from
beaver felt. Due to the limitations of beaver fur, hat-makers relied
heavily on [North America](North_America "wikilink") for imports as
beaver was only available in the [Scandinavian
peninsula](Scandinavian_Peninsula "wikilink").[3]

Other than the military, fur has been used for accessories such as hats,
hoods, scarves, and muffs. Design elements including the visuals of the
animal were considered acceptable with heads, tails and paws still being
kept on the accessories. During the nineteenth century,
[seal](Sea_lion "wikilink") and [karakul](Karakul_sheep "wikilink") were
made into indoor jackets. The twentieth century was the beginning of the
fur coats being fashionable in West Europe with full fur coats. With
lifestyle changes as a result of developments like indoor heating, the
international textile trade affected how fur was distributed around the
world. Europeans focused on using local resources giving fur association
with femininity with the increasing use of mink. In 1970, Germany was
the world’s largest fur market. The International Fur Trade Federation
banned endangering species furs like silk monkey, ocelot, leopard,
tiger, and polar bear in 1975. The use of animal skins were brought to
light during the 1980s by animal right organisations and the demand for
fur decreased. Anti-fur organisations raised awareness of the
controversy between animal welfare and fashion. Fur farming became
banned in Britain in 1999. During the twenty-first century, fox and mink
have been bred in captivity with Denmark, Holland and Finland being
leaders of mink production.[4]

Fur is still worn in most mild and cool climates around the world due to
its superior warmth and durability. From the days of early European
settlement, up until the development of modern clothing alternatives,
fur clothing was popular in Canada during the cold winters. The
invention of inexpensive synthetic textiles for insulating clothing led
to fur clothing falling out of [fashion](fashion "wikilink").

Fur is still used by [indigenous people](indigenous_people "wikilink")
and developed societies, due to its availability and superior
[insulation](Thermal_insulation "wikilink") properties. The
[Inuit](Inuit "wikilink") peoples of the Arctic relied on fur for most
of their clothing, and it also forms a part of traditional clothing in
[Russia](Russia "wikilink"), [Ukraine](Ukraine "wikilink"),
[Yugoslavia](Yugoslavia "wikilink"),
[Scandinavia](Scandinavia "wikilink"), and [Japan](Japan "wikilink").

It is also sometimes associated with glamour and lavish spending. A
number of consumers and designers—notably British fashion designer and
outspoken animal rights activist [Stella
McCartney](Stella_McCartney "wikilink")—reject fur due to moral beliefs
and [cruelty to animals](cruelty_to_animals "wikilink").[5]

Animal furs used in garments and trim may be dyed bright colors or with
patterns, often to mimic exotic animal pelts: alternatively they may be
left their original pattern and color. Fur may be shorn down to imitate
the feel of [velvet](velvet "wikilink"), creating a fabric called
[shearling](shearling "wikilink").

Intro of alternatives in the early 20th century brought tension to
clothing industry as the faux fur manufacturers started producing faux
fur and capitalising on profits. By 1950s synthetic fur garments had
become extremely popular and affordable. Newspapers were writing
articles on major chemical companies trying to out do each other in the
quest to create the most realistic fake fur.[6]

The popularity of natural fur has gone up and down in recent years.
Vogue Paris published a homage to fur in August 2017 and later Gucci
followed the idea of not using animal fur other high end brands to
follow this lead are Stella McCartney, Givenchy, Calvin Klein, Ralph
Lauren, Michael Kors, Philosophy di Lorenzo Serafini. Burberry announced
to stop sending model with fur on runways however did not stop selling
it in stores. There are many companies that are taking the imitative of
coming up with more sustainable ways in producing leather and fur.
Designer Ingar Helgason is developing Bio fur which would grows
synthetic pelts the way that Modern Meadow has been able to produce
grown leather and Diamond foundry created lab grown diamonds. BOF fur
debate hosted by Zilberkweit director of the British Fur Association
argued that natural fur was more sustainable, many forms of faux fur are
not biodegradable “Our industry is about raising animals in a natural
way, a kind way and it’s a renewable source. However not everyone agrees
to this others said that chemical processes needed to treat animals’ fur
in order to be worn are just as detrimental to the environment.[7] [8]

In spite of organized backlash against it, the fur market in 2016 was
$30 billion. Heritage fashion houses such as
[Hermès](Hermès "wikilink"), [Dior](Dior "wikilink") and
[Chanel](Chanel "wikilink") still use natural fur. Alex Mcintosh, who
leads the Fashion Futures post grad program at London College of
Fashion, says “Change on this level would only be driven on a genuine
lack of demand and not just social media outcry”.[9]

## Sources

Common animal sources for fur clothing and fur trimmed accessories
include [fox](fox "wikilink"),
[rabbit](Rabbit#Rabbits_as_food_and_clothing "wikilink"),
[mink](mink "wikilink"), [raccoon dogs](raccoon_dog "wikilink"),
[muskrat](muskrat "wikilink"), [beaver](beaver "wikilink"),
[stoat](stoat "wikilink") (ermine), [otter](otter "wikilink"),
[sable](sable "wikilink"), [seals](Pinniped "wikilink"),
[cats](cat "wikilink"), [dogs](dog "wikilink"),
[coyotes](coyote "wikilink"), [wolves](wolf "wikilink"),
[chinchilla](chinchilla "wikilink"), [opossum](opossum "wikilink") and
[common brushtail possum](common_brushtail_possum "wikilink").[10] Some
of these are more highly prized than others, and there are many grades
and colors.

The import and sale of seal products was banned in the U.S. in 1972 over
conservation concerns about Canadian seals. The import and sale is still
banned even though the Marine Animal Response Society estimates the harp
seal population is thriving at approximately 8 million.[11] The import,
export and sales of domesticated cat and dog fur were also banned in the
U.S. under the Dog and Cat Protection Act of 2000.[12]

Most of the fur sold by high fashion retailers globally is from farmed
animals such as mink, foxes, and rabbits. Cruel methods of killing have
made people more aware as the animal rights activists work harder to
protect the animals. The recommendations (2001) of the European
Commission’s Scientific Committee on Animal Health and Animal Welfare
(SCAHAW) state correspondingly: ‘In comparison with other farm animals,
species farmed for their fur have been subjected to relatively little
active selection except with respect to fur characteristics.[13][14]

## Processing of fur

![](Nutukkaat.JPG "fig:Nutukkaat.JPG") fur
[footwear](footwear "wikilink")\]\] The manufacturing of fur clothing
involves obtaining animal pelts where the hair is left on. Depending on
the type of fur and its purpose, some of the chemicals involved in fur
processing may include table salts, alum salts, acids, soda ash,
sawdust, cornstarch, lanolin, degreasers and, less commonly, bleaches,
dyes and toners (for dyed fur).[15] Workers exposed to fur dust created
during fur processing have been shown to have reduced pulmonary function
in direct proportion to their length of exposure.[16]

The use of [wool](wool "wikilink") involves shearing the animal's fleece
from the living animal, so that the wool can be regrown but
[sheepskin](sheepskin "wikilink") [shearling](shearling "wikilink") is
made by retaining the fleece to the leather and shearing it.[17]
Shearling is used for boots, jackets and coats..

In contrast, [leather](leather "wikilink") made from any animal hide
involves removing the fur from the skin and using only the tanned skin.
However, the use of [wool](wool "wikilink") involves shearing the
animal's hair from the living animal. [Fake fur](Fake_fur "wikilink")
(or "faux fur") designates any [synthetic
material](Synthetic_fiber "wikilink") that attempts to mimic the
appearance and feel of real fur.

The chemical treatment of fur to increase its felting quality is known
as carroting, as the process tends to turn the tips of the fur a carrot
orange color. A furrier is a person who makes fur products such as fur
garments, fur blankets etc. and repairs, alters, cleans, or otherwise
deals in furs of animals.

Fur factories are extremely harmful to soil. The process of fur
manufacturing includes waterways-pumping waste and the toxic chemicals
in to the surrounding environment. On the other hand, fur is naturally
biodegradable, whereas faux fur is not.[18]

## Anti-fur campaigns

Anti-fur campaigns were popularized the 1980s and 1990s, with the
participation of numerous celebrities.[19] Fur clothing has become the
focus of boycotts on the opinion that it is cruel and unnecessary.
[PETA](PETA "wikilink") and other animal rights organizations,
celebrities, and animal rights ethicists, have called attention to fur
farming.

[Animal rights](Animal_rights "wikilink") advocates object to the
trapping and killing of wildlife, and to the confinement and killing of
animals on [fur farms](Fur_farming "wikilink") due to concerns about the
animals suffering and death. They may also condemn "alternatives" made
from synthetic (oil-based) clothing as they promote fur for the sake of
fashion. Protests also include objection to the use of leather in
clothing, shoes and accessories.

Some animal rights activists have disrupted fur fashion shows with
protests, while other anti-fur protesters may use fashion shows
featuring faux furs or other alternatives to fur clothing as a platform
to highlight animal suffering from the use of real leathers and furs.
These groups sponsor "Compassionate Fashion Day" on the third Saturday
of August to promote their anti-fur message. Some American groups
participate in "Fur Free Friday", an event held annually on the Friday
after Thanksgiving ([Black Friday](Black_Friday_(shopping) "wikilink"))
that uses displays, protests, and other methods to highlight their
beliefs regarding furs.

In Canada, opposition to the annual [seal hunt](seal_hunt "wikilink") is
viewed as an anti-fur issue, although the [Humane Society of the United
States](Humane_Society_of_the_United_States "wikilink") claims that its
opposition is to "the largest slaughter of marine mammals on Earth."[20]
[IFAW](IFAW "wikilink"), an anti-sealing group, claims that Canada has
an "abysmal record of enforcement" of anti-cruelty laws surrounding the
hunt.[21] A Canadian government survey[22] indicated that two-thirds of
Canadians supported the hunting of seals if the regulations under
Canadian law are enforced.

Products from all marine mammals, even from non-threatened populations
and regulated hunts, such as the Canadian seal hunt, are banned in the
United States, with minor exceptions for [Alaska
Natives](Alaska_Natives "wikilink").[23]

PETA representative Johanna Fuoss credits social media and email
marketing campaigns for helping to mobilize an unprecedented number of
animal rights activists. “In the year before Michael Kors stopped using
fur, he had received more than 150,000 emails,” Fuoss tells
Highsnobiety. “This puts a certain pressure on designers who can see
that the zeitgeist is moving away from fur. ”New technologies and
platforms have made it easier than ever for those advocating change to
get results. While in the past, activists had to invade runways with
signs and paint, or physically mail privately viewed letters, today’s
activist can raise a commotion without leaving the house.[24][25][26]

The rise of social media has provided the general public with a direct
line of communication to companies and a platform for opinions and
protest, making it harder for brands to ignore targeted activism.
“Brands are under huge pressure to respond to social media and avoid any
controversy.” Says Mark Oaten, chief executive of the IFF. [27] The
anti-fur messaging is being amplified by social media and a millennial
customer base that is paying closer attention to the values represented
by the products they buy.

The feeling of outrage against animal suffering is particularly intense
when cats and dogs are involved, since these are the most popular pets
in Western countries. Therefore, consumers demand to be assured about
the production of furs, in order to avoid the risk of inadvertently
buying products made with fur from these animals. To counteract the
growing concern of consumers, European Union officially banned the
import and export from all Member States of dog and cat furs, and all
products containing fur from these species, with the Regulation
1523/2007 [28], applying since 31st December 2008. A combined method for
species identification in furs, based on a combined morphological and
molecular approach, has been proposed to discriminate dog and cat furs
from allowed fur-bearing species, as this is a necessary step to comply
with the ban [29] [30].

## Fur trade

The fur trade is the worldwide buying and selling of fur for clothing
and other purposes. The fur trade was one of the driving forces of
exploration of North America and the Russian Far East.

## Contemporary fashion industries

`   Today, fur is a popular material used by many fashion brands within the luxury sector, this includes high fashion labels Dior, Fendi, Oscar de la Renta and Louis Vuitton, as well as high street brands like Canada Goose and upcoming designers such as Saks Potts.`

In recent years, some brands and department stores have decided to ban
fur and use alternative materials known as 'faux fur' or 'fake fur'.
Reasons for this include ethical concerns and media awareness, with
Burberry announcing they were banning fur after a highly publicised
scandal about burning billions of dollars worth of excess stock was made
public in 2018.[31] Fashion brands often equate their decision to go
fur-free as part of their sustainability strategy, however, what many of
these brands, including Gucci and Versace, fail to take into account are
the problems the natural fashion material alternative create. The only
alternative to natural materials, including fur, leather, cashmere,
wool, cotton, silk and exotic skins is synthetic fibres. Faux fur and
leather is cleverly marketed as 'vegan', 'cruelty-free', 'eco-friendly'
when in reality fake fur and leather is plastic deriving from crude-oil.
This includes polyester, nylon and acrylic, the main fashion materials
used by fashion fashion brands. Many brands are being exposed by
consumer watchdogs for their misrepresentation of plastic materials
which are not only bad for the environment, but inherently more
destructive through production and their entire life cycle when compared
to their natural originals. A natural fur garment will being decomposing
within four-weeks, where as a synthetic plastic faux-fur garment will
take approximately two-thousand years to breakdown into smaller and
smaller pieces known as micro-plastics. These plastics will never truly
return to nature, instead they release toxic chemicals into the
environment and have been found in the food chain. Simply put, natural
materials like natural fur and leather are biodegradable, synthetic
materials are not. In conclusion, substitutes of animal fur
unequivocally harms the environment.

## See also

-   [Fur farming](Fur_farming "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Fur](Category:Fur "wikilink") [Category:Clothing by
material](Category:Clothing_by_material "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing](Category:History_of_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Clothing
controversies](Category:Clothing_controversies "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] ["Fur-Free Designers and
Retailers"](http://www.hsus.org/furfree/fashion/retailers/furfree_retailers_designers.html)
July 31, 2009.

[6] Burberry Stops Destroying Product and Bans Real Fur. (2018,
September 06). Retrieved from
<https://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/professional/burberry-stops-destroying-product-and-bans-real-fur>

[7] Op-Ed \| Fashion's Fur-Free Future. (2018, August 11). Retrieved
from
<https://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/opinion/op-ed-fashions-fur-free-future>

[8] Maisey, S. (2018, January 06). With more fashion brands declaring
themselves fur free, what's next for the fur industry? . Retrieved from
<https://www.thenational.ae/lifestyle/with-more-fashion-brands-declaring-themselves-fur-free-what-s-next-for-the-fur-industry-1.693095>

[9] Maisey, S. (2018, January 06). With more fashion brands declaring
themselves fur free, what's next for the fur industry? . Retrieved from
<https://www.thenational.ae/lifestyle/with-more-fashion-brands-declaring-themselves-fur-free-what-s-next-for-the-fur-industry-1.693095>

[10]

[11] ["Harp Seal"](http://www.marineanimals.ca/species/harp_eng.html),
Marine Animal Response Society.

[12] [Rules and Regulations Under the Fur Products Labeling
Act](http://www.ftc.gov/os/statutes/textile/fedreg/001228-fur.htm)

[13] The environmental costs and health risks of fur. (n.d.). Retrieved
from <https://www.furfreealliance.com/environment-and-health/>

[14] Fur bans. (n.d.). Retrieved from
<https://www.furfreealliance.com/fur-bans/>

[15]

[16]

[17] Australian Wool Corporation, Australian Wool Classing, Raw Wool
Services, 1990.

[18] Hoskins, T. (2013, October 29). Is the fur trade sustainable?
Retrieved from
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sustainable-fashion-blog/is-fur-trade-sustainable>

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24] Balmat, N. (2018, April 01). From vegan leather to bio fur: Growing
materials from cells. Retrieved from
<https://futur404.com/growing-materials-cells/>

[25] Op-Ed \| Fashion's Fur-Free Future. (2018, August 11). Retrieved
from
<https://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/opinion/op-ed-fashions-fur-free-future>

[26] Waters, A. (2018, September 25). How Social Media is Pushing Fur
Out of Fashion. Retrieved from
<https://www.highsnobiety.com/p/social-media-pushing-fur-out-fashion/>

[27] Tamison., O. 2018. Why Fashion’s Anti-Fur Movement is Winning.
Business of Fashion. Retrieved from
<https://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/intelligence/why-fashions-anti-fur-movement-is-winning>

[28] European Parliament. 2007. Regulation (EC) No 1523/2007 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2007 banning the
placing on the market and the import to, or export from, the Community
of cat and dog fur, and products containing such fur

[29] Mariacher A, Garofalo L, Fanelli R, Lorenzini R, Fico R. 2019. A
combined morphological and molecular approach for hair identification to
comply with the European ban on dog and cat fur trade. PeerJ 7:e7955.
<https://peerj.com/articles/7955/?td=wk>

[30] Garofalo L, Mariacher A, Fanelli R, Fico R, Lorenzini R. 2018.
Hindering the illegal trade in dog and cat furs through a DNA-based
protocol for species identification. PeerJ 6:e4902
<https://peerj.com/articles/4902/?td=wk>

[31] <https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-44885983>