**Goldbeater's skin** is the processed outer membrane of the
[intestine](intestine "wikilink") of an animal, typically an
[ox](oxen "wikilink"), valued for its strength against tearing. The term
derives from its traditional use as durable layers interleaved between
sheets of gold stock during the process of making [gold
leaf](gold_leaf "wikilink") by [goldbeating](goldbeating "wikilink"), as
a batch process producing many "leaves" at the same time. In the early
modern production of [airships](airship "wikilink"), application of its
high strength-to-weight ratio and reliability were crucial for building
at least the largest examples.

## Manufacture

To manufacture goldbeater's skin, the gut of [oxen](oxen "wikilink") (or
other [cattle](cattle "wikilink")) is soaked in a dilute solution of
[potassium hydroxide](potassium_hydroxide "wikilink"), washed,
stretched, beaten flat and thin, and treated chemically to prevent
[putrefaction](putrefaction "wikilink"). A pack of 1,000 pieces of
goldbeater's skin requires the gut of about 400 oxen and is thick.

Up to 120 sheets of gold laminated with goldbeater's skin can be beaten
at the same time, since the skin is thin and elastic and does not tear
under heavy [goldbeating](goldbeating "wikilink"). The resultant
thickness of gold leaf can be as small as 1 μm-thick.

## Application areas

### Humidity sensor

Goldbeater's skin is used as the sensitive element in
[hygrometers](hygrometer "wikilink"), since its
[hygroscopic](hygroscopy "wikilink") behavior includes contraction or
expansion in response to atmospheric humidity.

### Early telephones

[Alexander Graham Bell](Alexander_Graham_Bell "wikilink") used a drum of
goldbeater's skin with an armature of magnetised iron attached to its
middle as a sound receiver (*see [Invention of the
telephone](Invention_of_the_telephone "wikilink")*).

### Printing material

The [North German Confederation](North_German_Confederation "wikilink")
printed 10- and 30-[groschen](groschen "wikilink") [postage
stamps](postage_stamp "wikilink") on goldbeater's skin to prevent reuse
of these high-value stamps.

### Airtight test instruments

[Joseph Thomas Clover](Joseph_Thomas_Clover "wikilink") invented an
apparatus for measuring the inhalation of
[chloroform](chloroform "wikilink") in 1862; it included a large
reservoir bag, lined with goldbeater's skin to make it airtight, into
which a known volume of liquid chloroform was injected, while its
contraction or expansion was monitored.[1]

### Old manuscripts repair

Due to its transparency, strength, and fairly uniform thickness,
goldbeater's skin is also used to repair holes and tears in manuscripts
written on [vellum](vellum "wikilink").

### Construction of airships

Large quantities of goldbeater's skin were used to make the gas bags of
early balloons created by the Royal Engineers at [Chatham,
Kent](Chatham,_Kent "wikilink") starting in 1881–82 culminating in 1883
with "The Heron", of 10,000 cu ft capacity. The method of preparing and
making gas-tight joins in the skins was known only to a family from
Alsatia called Weinling who were employed by the RE for many years. The
British had a monopoly on the technique until around 1912 when the
Germans adopted the material for the internal gas bags of the "Zeppelin"
[rigid airships](rigid_airship "wikilink"), exhausting the available
supply: about 200,000 sheets were used for a typical [World War
I](World_War_I "wikilink") [Zeppelin](Zeppelin "wikilink"), while the
[USS *Shenandoah*](USS_Shenandoah_(ZR-1) "wikilink") needed 750,000
sheets.[2] The sheets were joined together and folded into impermeable
layers.[3]

### Sealing of oboe mouthpieces

Goldbeater's skin (sometimes also called "fish skin" in this context) is
sometimes also used to seal [oboe](oboe "wikilink")
[reeds](Double_reed "wikilink") to prevent them from leaking air.[4]

### Test material

The [goldbeater's skin test](Tannin#Tests_for_tannins "wikilink") is
used to assess the [tanning](tannin "wikilink") properties of a
compound.

### Early condoms

In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, goldbeater's skin was also
used as a material for condoms.[5].

## See also

-   [Vark](Vark "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   Jack C. Thompson, [Notes on the Manufacture of Goldbeater's
    Skin](http://cool.conservation-us.org/coolaic/sg/bpg/annual/v02/bp02-15.html)
-   [Bookbinding and the Conservation of Books: Goldbeater's
    skin](http://cool.conservation-us.org/don//dt/dt1574.html)
-   Robert Fuchs, [The History and Biology of
    Parchment](https://web.archive.org/web/20060319051027/http://www.karger.com/gazette/67/fuchs/art_5.htm)
-   Chollet, L., Technical Section of Aeronautics   December 1922

[Category:Gilding](Category:Gilding "wikilink") [Category:Airship
technology](Category:Airship_technology "wikilink")
[Category:Hides](Category:Hides "wikilink")

[1] Sykes, W.S. (1960), *Essays on the First Hundred Years of
Anaesthesia*, Vol. 2, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. , p. 8.

[2]

[3]

[4] [ItemID=210&SesssionID=68662662&code=0001000200010009&sid=290&stitle=Oboe%20Reed-making
Goldbeaters' skin for Oboe - large - Oboe Reed-making - Britannia
Reeds](http://www.britanniareeds.com/_ItemDetail.as)

[5] François Lebrun, *Les "Funestes secrets"* Les Collections de
l'Histoire, 2nd quarter 2006, p. 63