---
title: Gore-Tex
permalink: /Gore-Tex/
---

[thumb\|GORE-TEX® Logo](/File:GORE-TEX®_Logo.jpg "wikilink")

**Gore-Tex** is a [waterproof, breathable
fabric](/waterproof_fabric "wikilink") membrane and registered trademark
of [W. L. Gore and Associates](/W._L._Gore_and_Associates "wikilink").
Invented in 1969, Gore-Tex can repel liquid water while allowing water
vapor to pass through and is designed to be a lightweight, waterproof
fabric for all-weather use. It is composed of stretched
[polytetrafluoroethylene](/polytetrafluoroethylene "wikilink") (PTFE),
which is more commonly known by the [generic
trademark](/generic_trademark "wikilink") Teflon.

## History

Gore-Tex was co-invented by [Wilbert L. Gore](/Bill_Gore "wikilink") and
Gore's son, [Robert W. Gore](/Robert_W._Gore "wikilink").[1] In 1969,
Bob Gore stretched heated rods of
[polytetrafluoroethylene](/polytetrafluoroethylene "wikilink") (PTFE)
and created expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE). His discovery of
the right conditions for stretching PTFE was a happy accident, born
partly of frustration. Instead of slowly stretching the heated material,
he applied a sudden, accelerating yank. The solid PTFE unexpectedly
stretched about 800%, forming a microporous structure that was about 70%
air.[2] It was introduced to the public under the trademark Gore-Tex.[3]

Gore promptly applied for and obtained the following patents:

-   , issued April 27, 1976, for a porous form of
    polytetrafluoroethylene with a micro-structure characterized by
    nodes interconnected by [fibrils](/fibrils "wikilink")

-   , issued February 5, 1980

-   on March 18, 1980 for a "waterproof laminate", together with Samuel
    Allen

Another form of stretched PTFE tape was produced prior to Gore-Tex in
1966, by John W. Cropper of [New Zealand](/New_Zealand "wikilink").
Cropper had developed and constructed a machine for this use. However,
Cropper chose to keep the process of creating expanded PTFE as a closely
held [trade secret](/trade_secret "wikilink") and as such, it had
remained unpublished.[4][5]

In the 1970s [Garlock, Inc.](/Garlock_Sealing_Technologies "wikilink")
allegedly infringed Gore's patents by using Cropper's machine and was
[sued](/lawsuit "wikilink") by Gore in the [Federal District
Court](/Federal_District_Court "wikilink") of [Ohio](/Ohio "wikilink").
The District Court held Gore's product and process patents to be invalid
after a "bitterly contested case" that "involved over two years of
[discovery](/discovery_(legal) "wikilink"), five weeks of trial, the
testimony of 35 witnesses (19 live, 16 by deposition), and over 300
exhibits" (quoting the Federal Circuit). On appeal, however, the Federal
Circuit disagreed in the famous case of *Gore v. Garlock*, reversing the
lower court's decision on the ground, as well as others, that Cropper
forfeited any superior claim to the invention by virtue of having
concealed the process for making ePTFE from the public. As a public
patent had not been filed, the new form of the material could not be
legally recognised. Gore was thereby established as the legal inventor
of ePTFE.[6][7]

Following the Gore v. Garlock decision, Gore sued [C. R.
Bard](/C._R._Bard "wikilink") for allegedly infringing its patent by
making [ePTFE](/ePTFE "wikilink") vascular grafts. Bard promptly settled
and agreed to exit the market. Gore next sued IMPRA, Inc., a smaller
maker of ePTFE vascular grafts, in the federal district court in
Arizona. IMPRA had a competing patent application for the ePTFE vascular
graft. In a nearly decade-long patent/antitrust battle (1984–1993),
IMPRA proved that Gore-Tex was identical to prior art disclosed in a
Japanese process patent by duplicating the prior art process and through
statistical analysis, and also proved that Gore had withheld the best
mode for using its patent, and the main claim of Gore's product patent
was declared invalid in 1990.[8] In 1996, IMPRA was purchased by Bard
and Bard was thereby able to reenter the market. After IMPRA's vascular
graft patent was issued, Bard sued Gore for infringing it.

Gore-Tex is used in products manufactured by many different companies.

Other products have come to market exploiting similar technologies
following the expiry of the main Gore-Tex patent.[9]

For his invention, Robert W. Gore was inducted into the [U.S. National
Inventors Hall of
Fame](/U.S._National_Inventors_Hall_of_Fame "wikilink") in 2006.[10]

In 2015, Gore was ordered by the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals to pay
Bard $1 billion in damages.[11] The U.S. Supreme Court declined to
review the Federal Circuit's decision.[12][13]

## Manufacture

[thumb\|Schematic of a composite fabric for outdoor
clothing](/Image:Goretex_schema-en.png "wikilink")

PTFE is made using an [emulsion
polymerization](/emulsion_polymerization "wikilink") process that
utilizes the [fluorosurfactant](/fluorosurfactant "wikilink")
[PFOA](/Perfluorooctanoic_acid "wikilink"),[14][15] a persistent
environmental contaminant. In 2013, Gore eliminated the use of PFOAs in
the manufacture of its weatherproof functional fabrics.[16]

## Design

[thumb\|Effect of water repellent on a shell layer jacket
([Haglöfs](Haglöfs "wikilink") Heli
II)](/File:Water_repellent_shell_layer_jacket.jpg "wikilink")

Gore-Tex materials are typically based on thermo-mechanically expanded
PTFE and other [fluoropolymer](/fluoropolymer "wikilink") products. They
are used in a wide variety of applications such as high-performance
fabrics, [medical implants](/medical_implant "wikilink"),
[filter](/filter_(chemistry) "wikilink") media,
[insulation](/Electrical_insulation "wikilink") for wires and cables,
[gaskets](/gasket "wikilink"), and sealants. However, Gore-Tex fabric is
best known for its use in protective, yet breathable, rainwear.

The simplest sort of rain wear is a two layer sandwich. The outer layer
is typically [nylon](/nylon "wikilink") or
[polyester](/polyester "wikilink") and provides strength. The inner one
is [polyurethane](/polyurethane "wikilink") (abbreviated: PU), and
provides water resistance, at the cost of breathability.

Early Gore-Tex fabric replaced the inner layer of PU with a thin, porous
fluoropolymer membrane ([Teflon](/Teflon "wikilink")) coating that is
bonded to a fabric. This membrane had about 9 billion [pores per square
inch](/porosity "wikilink") (around 1.4 billion pores per square
centimeter). Each pore is approximately the size of a water droplet,
making it impenetrable to liquid water while still allowing the more
volatile water vapour molecules to pass through.

The outer layer of Gore-Tex fabric is coated on the outside with a
[Durable Water Repellent](/Durable_Water_Repellent "wikilink") (DWR)
treatment. The DWR prevents the main outer layer from becoming wet,
which would reduce the breathability of the whole fabric. However, the
DWR is not responsible for the jacket being waterproof. Without the DWR,
the outer layer would become soaked, there would be no breathability,
and the wearer's sweat being produced on the inside would fail to
evaporate, leading to dampness there. This might give the appearance
that the fabric is leaking, but it is not. Wear and cleaning will reduce
the performance of Gore-Tex fabric by wearing away this Durable Water
Repellent (DWR) treatment. The DWR can be reinvigorated by tumble drying
the garment or ironing on a low setting.[17]

Gore requires that all garments made from their material have taping
over the seams, to eliminate leaks. Gore's sister product,
[Windstopper](/Windstopper "wikilink"), is similar to Gore-Tex in being
windproof and breathable and it can stretch but it is not waterproof.
The Gore naming system does not imply specific technology or material
but instead specific set of performance characteristics.[18]

## Clothing technology and lifestyle

Expanded polytetrafluoroethylene is used in clothing due to its
breathability and water protection capabilities. It is used in rain
jackets, and ePTFE can now be found in space suits and heart
patches.[19]

## Other uses

Gore-Tex is also used internally in medical applications, because it is
nearly inert inside the body. Specifically, expanded
polytetrafluoroethylene (E-PTFE) can undergo the form of a fabric-like
mesh. Implementing and applying the mesh form in the medical field, is a
promising type of technological material feature.[20] In addition, the
porosity of Gore-Tex permits the body's own tissue to grow through the
material, integrating grafted material into the circulation system.[21]
Gore-Tex is used in a wide variety of medical applications, including
sutures, vascular grafts, heart patches, and synthetic knee ligaments,
which have saved thousands of lives.[22] In the form of expanded
polytetrafluoroethylene (E-PTFE), Gore-Tex has been shown to be a
reliable synthetic, medical material in treating patients with nasal
dorsal interruptions.[23] In more recent observations, expanded
polytetrafluoroethylene (E-PTFE) has recently been used as membrane
implants for [glaucoma surgery](/trabeculectomy "wikilink").[24]

Gore-Tex has been used for many years in the conservation of
[illuminated manuscripts](/illuminated_manuscripts "wikilink").[25]

Explosive sensors have been printed on Gore-Tex clothing leading to the
sensitive voltametric detection of nitroaromatic compounds.[26]

Gore-Tex is also used as a membrane in sealed battery products, to allow
pressure relief from [outgassing](/outgassing "wikilink"), but
preventing ingress of moisture.

The "Gore-Tex" [brand name](/brand_name "wikilink") was formerly used
for industrial and medical products.[27][28]

<File:Goretex> photo.png\|Gore-Tex membrane under an electron microscope
<File:Gore> 1.jpg\|Gore-Tex Medical Devices Sample Kit, [Science History
Institute](/Science_History_Institute "wikilink")

## See also

-   [Extended Cold Weather Clothing
    System](/Extended_Cold_Weather_Clothing_System "wikilink")
-   [Hipora](/Hipora "wikilink")
-   [SympaTex](/SympaTex "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-

-   [Gore website](http://www.gore.com/)

[Category:American inventions](/Category:American_inventions "wikilink")
[Category:Brand name
materials](/Category:Brand_name_materials "wikilink")
[Category:Fluoropolymers](/Category:Fluoropolymers "wikilink")
[Category:Products introduced in
1976](/Category:Products_introduced_in_1976 "wikilink")
[Category:Technical fabrics](/Category:Technical_fabrics "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9] Logue, Victoria. (2005). *[Hiking and
Backpacking](https://books.google.com/books?id=a1GhI_N98VoC&pg=PA74)*.
Menasha Ridge Press. p. 74. .

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]