![](La_Roche_Jagu_chanvre_1.JPG "fig:La_Roche_Jagu_chanvre_1.JPG"),
[Brittany](Brittany_(administrative_region) "wikilink"),
[France](France "wikilink") ([Europe](Europe "wikilink")'s largest hemp
producer)\]\] **Hemp**, or **industrial hemp**, is a
[strain](strain_(biology) "wikilink") of the *[Cannabis
sativa](Cannabis_sativa "wikilink")* plant species that is grown
specifically for the industrial uses of its derived products.[1] It is
one of the fastest growing plants[2] and was one of the first plants to
be spun into usable [fiber](fiber "wikilink") 10,000 years ago.[3] It
can be refined into a variety of commercial items, including paper,
[textiles](textile "wikilink"), clothing, biodegradable plastics, paint,
insulation, biofuel, food, and animal feed.[4][5]

Although [cannabis as a drug](Cannabis_(drug) "wikilink") and industrial
hemp both derive from the species *Cannabis sativa* and contain the
[psychoactive](psychoactive "wikilink") component
[tetrahydrocannabinol](tetrahydrocannabinol "wikilink") (THC), they are
distinct [strains](strain_(biology) "wikilink") with unique
[phytochemical](phytochemistry "wikilink") compositions and uses. Hemp
has lower concentrations of THC and higher concentrations of
[cannabidiol](cannabidiol "wikilink") (CBD), which decreases or
eliminates its psychoactive effects. The legality of industrial hemp
varies widely between countries. Some governments regulate the
concentration of THC and permit only hemp that is bred with an
especially low THC content.[6][7]

## Etymology

The etymology is uncertain but there appears to be no common
[Proto-Indo-European](Proto-Indo-European "wikilink") source for the
various forms of the word; the Greek term ** is the oldest attested
form, which may have been borrowed from an earlier
[Scythian](Scythian "wikilink") or [Thracian](Thracian "wikilink")
word.[8][9] Then it appears to have been borrowed into Latin, and
separately into Slavic and from there into Baltic, Finnish, and
[Germanic languages](Germanic_language "wikilink").[10]

In the Germanic languages, following [Grimm's
law](Grimm's_law "wikilink"), the "k" would have changed to "h" with the
first Germanic sound shift,[11][12] after which it may have been adapted
into the Old English form, **.[13]
[Barber](Elizabeth_Wayland_Barber "wikilink") (1991) however, argued
that the spread of the name "kannabis" was due to its historically more
recent plant use, starting from the south, around Iran, whereas non-THC
varieties of hemp are older and prehistoric.[14] Another possible source
of origin is Assyrian *qunnabu*, which was the name for a source of oil,
fiber, and medicine in the 1st millennium BC.[15]

[Cognates](Cognates "wikilink") of hemp in other Germanic languages
include Dutch *hennep*, Danish and Norwegian *hamp*, German *Hanf*, and
Swedish *hampa*. In those languages "hemp" can refer to either
industrial fiber hemp or narcotic cannabis strains.[16]

## Uses

![](Hemp_bunch-dried_out_-seeds_close_up_PNr°0063.jpg "Hemp_bunch-dried_out_-seeds_close_up_PNr°0063.jpg")

Hemp is used to make a variety of commercial and industrial products,
including rope, textiles, clothing, shoes, food, paper, bioplastics,
insulation, and biofuel.[17] The [bast fibers](bast_fiber "wikilink")
can be used to make textiles that are 100% hemp, but they are commonly
blended with other fibers, such as [flax](flax "wikilink"), cotton or
silk, as well as virgin and recycled polyester, to make woven fabrics
for apparel and furnishings. The inner two fibers of the plant are
woodier and typically have industrial applications, such as mulch,
animal bedding, and litter. When [oxidized](oxidize "wikilink") (often
erroneously referred to as "drying"), [hemp oil](hemp_oil "wikilink")
from the seeds becomes solid and can be used in the manufacture of
oil-based paints, in creams as a moisturizing agent, for cooking, and in
plastics. Hemp seeds have been used in bird feed mix as well.[18] A
survey in 2003 showed that more than 95% of hemp seed sold in the
[European Union](European_Union "wikilink") was used in animal and bird
feed.[19]

### Food

**Hemp seeds** can be eaten raw, ground into hemp meal,
[sprouted](sprouting "wikilink") or made into dried sprout powder. Hemp
seeds can also be made into a liquid and used for baking or for
beverages such as [hemp milk](hemp_milk "wikilink") and
[tisanes](tisane "wikilink").[20] [Hemp oil](Hempseed_oil "wikilink") is
[cold-pressed](Hydraulic_press "wikilink") from the seed and is high in
[unsaturated fatty acids](unsaturated_fatty_acids "wikilink").[21] The
leaves of the hemp plant, while not as nutritional as the seeds, are
edible and can be consumed raw as [leafy
vegetables](leafy_vegetable "wikilink") in salads, and pressed to make
[juice](hemp_juice "wikilink").[22]

In 2011, the U.S. imported $11.5 million worth of hemp products, mostly
driven by growth in the demand for hemp seed and hemp oil for use as
ingredients in foods such as granola.[23]

In the UK, the [Department for Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs](Department_for_Environment,_Food_and_Rural_Affairs "wikilink")
treats hemp as a purely non-food crop, but with proper licensing and
proof of less than 0.2% [THC](THC "wikilink") concentration, hemp seeds
can be imported for [sowing](sowing "wikilink") or for sale as a food or
food ingredient.[24] In the U.S., imported hemp can be used legally in
food products and, , was typically sold in [health food
stores](health_food_store "wikilink") or through [mail
order](mail_order "wikilink").[25]

<File:HempSeed.jpg%7CWhole> hemp seeds <File:Konopne> seminko
loupane.jpg\|Hulled hemp seeds

#### Nutrition

A 100-gram portion of [hulled](hulled "wikilink") hemp seeds supplies
586 [calories](calories "wikilink"). They contain 5% water, 5%
[carbohydrates](carbohydrates "wikilink"), 49% total
[fat](fat "wikilink"), and 31% [protein](protein "wikilink"). Hemp seeds
are notable in providing 64% of the [Daily
Value](Daily_Value "wikilink") (DV) of protein per 100-gram serving.[26]
Hemp seeds are a rich source of [dietary
fiber](dietary_fiber "wikilink") (20% DV), [B
vitamins](B_vitamins "wikilink"), and the [dietary
minerals](dietary_minerals "wikilink") [manganese](manganese "wikilink")
(362% DV), [phosphorus](phosphorus "wikilink") (236% DV),
[magnesium](magnesium "wikilink") (197% DV), [zinc](zinc "wikilink")
(104% DV), and [iron](iron "wikilink") (61% DV). About 73% of the energy
in hempseed is in the form of fats and [essential fatty
acids](essential_fatty_acids "wikilink"),[27] mainly [polyunsaturated
fatty acids](polyunsaturated_fatty_acids "wikilink"),
[linoleic](linoleic_acid "wikilink"), [oleic](oleic_acid "wikilink"),
and [alpha-linolenic](alpha-linolenic_acid "wikilink") acids.[28] The
ratio of the 38.100 grams of polyunsaturated fats per 100 grams is 9.301
grams of omega‑3 to 28.698 grams of omega‑6.[29] Typicaly, the portion
suggested on packages for an adult is 30 grams, approximately three
tablespoons.

Hempseed's [amino acid](amino_acid "wikilink") profile is comparable to
other sources of protein such as meat, milk, eggs and
[soy](soy "wikilink").[30] [Protein digestibility-corrected amino acid
scores](Protein_Digestibility_Corrected_Amino_Acid_Score "wikilink")
(PDCAAS), which attempt to measure the degree to which a food for humans
is a "complete protein", were 0.49–0.53 for whole hemp seed, 0.46–0.51
for hempseed meal, and 0.63–0.66 for [hulled](hulled "wikilink")
hempseed.[31]

#### Storage

[Hemp oil](Hemp_oil "wikilink") oxidizes and turns
[rancid](Rancidification "wikilink") within a short period of time if
not stored properly;[32] its shelf life is extended when it is stored in
a dark airtight container and refrigerated. Both light and heat can
degrade hemp oil.[33]

### Fiber

Hemp fiber has been used extensively throughout history, with production
climaxing soon after being introduced to the New World. For centuries,
items ranging from rope, to fabrics, to industrial materials were made
from hemp fiber. Hemp was also commonly used to make sail
[canvas](canvas "wikilink"). The word "canvas" is derived from the word
*cannabis*.[34][35] Pure hemp has a texture similar to
[linen](linen "wikilink").[36] Because of its versatility for use in a
variety of products, today hemp is used in a number of consumer goods,
including clothing, shoes, accessories, dog collars, and home wares. For
clothing, in some instances, hemp is mixed with
[lyocell](lyocell "wikilink").[37]

<File:Hanfstengel.jpg%7CHemp> stem showing fibers
[File:Hemp-600x600.jpg\|100%](File:Hemp-600x600.jpg%7C100%) Hemp fabric
<File:Bai> woman hemp, shell-ornamented clothes - Yunnan Nationalities
Museum - DSC04339.JPG\|Hemp dress <File:Lisu> woman hemp,
shell-ornamented dress detail - Yunnan Nationalities Museum -
DSC04310.JPG\|Hemp dress <File:OutDoor> 2018, Friedrichshafen
(1X7A0347).jpg\|Hemp shorts <File:Hemp-sack>, Asabukuro, Japan.jpg\|Hemp
sack <File:800> Hemp olive 2010.jpg\|Hemp shoes

### Building material

Concrete-like blocks made with hemp and lime have been used as an
insulating material for construction. Such blocks are not strong enough
to be used for structural elements; they must be supported by a brick,
wood, or steel frame.[38] However, hemp fibres are extremely strong and
durable, and have been shown to be usable as a replacement for wood for
many jobs, including creating very durable and breathable homes. The
most common use of hemp lime in building is by casting the hemp and lime
mix while wet around a timber frame with temporary shuttering, and
tamping the mix to form a firm mass; after the removal of the temporary
shuttering, the solidified hemp mix is then ready to be plastered with a
lime plaster.[39]

The first example of the use of hempcrete was in 1986 in France with the
renovation of the Maison de la Turquie in
[Nogent-sur-Seine](Nogent-sur-Seine "wikilink") by the innovator Charles
Rasetti.[40] In the UK hemp lime was first used in 2000 for the
construction of two test dwellings in Haverhill.[41] Designed by Modece
Architects,[42] who pioneered hemp's use in UK construction, the hemp
houses were monitored in comparison with other standard dwellings by
BRE. Completed in 2009, the Renewable House is one of the most
technologically advanced made from hemp-based materials.[43] The first
US home made of hemp-based materials was completed in August 2010 in
Asheville, North Carolina.[44]

A panellized system of hemp-lime panels for use in building construction
is currently under test in a European Union-funded research
collaboration led by the [University of
Bath](University_of_Bath "wikilink"). The panels are being designed to
assure high-quality construction, rapid on-site erection, optimal
hygrothermal performance from day one, and energy- and
resource-efficient buildings. The 36-month work program aims to refine
product and manufacturing protocols and produce data for certification
and marketing, warranty, insurance cover, and availability of finance.
It also includes the development of markets in Britain, France, and
Spain.[45]

Hemp is used as an internal plaster and is a mixture of [hemp
hurd](hemp_hurd "wikilink") (shive) mixed with larger proportions of a
lime-based binder. Hemp plaster has insulative qualities.[46]

Spanplatte.jpg\|Hemp fiber board Daemmung Hanf
2011-by-RaBoe-03.jpg\|Hemp thermal insulation Bloc de chanvre isol
int.gif\|Hemp interior thermal insulation blocks Faux plafond isolation
acoustique.jpg\|Hemp acoustic ceiling insulation Bloc de chanvre ep
15cm.gif\|[Concrete block](Concrete_block "wikilink") made with hemp in
France

### Plastic and composite materials

A mixture of [fiberglass](fiberglass "wikilink"), hemp fiber,
[kenaf](kenaf "wikilink"), and [flax](flax "wikilink") has been used
since 2002 to make composite panels for automobiles.[47] The choice of
which [bast fiber](bast_fiber "wikilink") to use is primarily based on
cost and availability. Various car makers are beginning to use hemp in
their cars, including [Audi](Audi "wikilink"), [BMW](BMW "wikilink"),
[Ford](Ford "wikilink"), [GM](General_Motors "wikilink"),
[Chrysler](Chrysler "wikilink"), [Honda](Honda "wikilink"),
[Iveco](Iveco "wikilink"), [Lotus](Lotus_Cars "wikilink"),
[Mercedes](Mercedes-Benz "wikilink"),
[Mitsubishi](Mitsubishi "wikilink"), [Porsche](Porsche "wikilink"),
[Saturn](Saturn_Corporation "wikilink"),
[Volkswagen](Volkswagen "wikilink")[48] and Volvo. For example, the
Lotus Eco Elise[49] and the Mercedes C-Class both contain hemp (up to
20 kg in each car in the case of the latter).[50]

Türinnenverkleidung Hanf-PP nova.jpg\|Hemp plastic interior of a car
door <File:Handschuhfach> PP-NF CG.jpg\|Hemp plastic automobile glove
box [File:B-Säule](File:B-Säule) PP-NF CG.jpg\|Hemp plastic column,
automobile <File:Natural> fibre polymer nabasco.jpg\|Hemp composite sink
basin

### Paper

Hemp paper are [paper](paper "wikilink") varieties consisting
exclusively or to a large extent from [pulp](Pulp_(paper) "wikilink")
obtained from [fibers](Hemp_Fiber "wikilink") of [industrial
hemp](industrial_hemp "wikilink"). The products are mainly specialty
papers such as [cigarette paper](cigarette_paper "wikilink"),[51]
[banknotes](banknotes "wikilink") and technical [filter
papers](filter_paper "wikilink").[52] Compared to wood pulp, hemp pulp
offers a four to five times longer fibre, a significantly lower
[lignin](lignin "wikilink") fraction as well as a higher tear resistance
and [tensile strength](tensile_strength "wikilink"). However, production
costs are about four times higher than for paper from
[wood](wood "wikilink"),[53] so hemp paper could not be used for mass
applications as printing, writing and packaging paper.

### Jewelry

![](Hemp_and_Bead_Jewelry,_Oakland_Chinatown_Street_Fair.jpg "Hemp_and_Bead_Jewelry,_Oakland_Chinatown_Street_Fair.jpg")

[Hemp jewelry](Hemp_jewelry "wikilink") is the product of knotting hemp
twine through the practice of [macramé](macramé "wikilink"). Hemp
jewellery includes bracelets, necklaces, anklets, rings, watches, and
other adornments. Some jewellery features beads made from crystals,
[glass](glass "wikilink"), [stone](stone "wikilink"),
[wood](wood "wikilink") and [bones](bone "wikilink"). The hemp twine
varies in thickness and comes in a variety of colors. There are many
different [stitches](stitch_(textile_arts) "wikilink") used to create
hemp jewellery, however, the half knot and full knot stitches are most
common.

### Cordage

![](Cordage_en_chanvre.jpg "Cordage_en_chanvre.jpg")

Hemp rope was used in the [age of sailing
ships](Age_of_Sail "wikilink"), though the rope had to be protected by
[tarring](Tarring_(rope) "wikilink"), since hemp rope has a propensity
for breaking from [rot](Decomposition "wikilink"), as the capillary
effect of the rope-woven fibers tended to hold liquid at the interior,
while seeming dry from the outside.[54] Tarring was a labor-intensive
process, and earned sailors the nickname "[Jack
Tar](Jack_Tar "wikilink")". Hemp rope was phased out when [manila
rope](manila_rope "wikilink"), which does not require tarring, became
widely available. Manila is sometimes referred to as [Manila
hemp](Manila_hemp "wikilink"), but is not related to hemp; it is
[abacá](abacá "wikilink"), a species of [banana](banana "wikilink").

### Animal bedding

![](Hemp_Straw.JPG "Hemp_Straw.JPG")

Hemp shives are the core of the stem, hemp hurds are broken parts of the
core. In the EU, they are used for animal bedding (horses, for
instance), or for horticultural mulch.[55] Industrial hemp is much more
profitable if both fibers and shives (or even seeds) can be used.

### Water and soil purification

Hemp can be used as a "mop crop" to clear impurities out of wastewater,
such as sewage effluent, excessive phosphorus from chicken litter, or
other unwanted substances or chemicals. Additionally, hemp is being used
to clean contaminants at the [Chernobyl nuclear
disaster](Chernobyl_disaster "wikilink") site, by way of a process which
is known as [phytoremediation](phytoremediation "wikilink")—the process
of clearing radioisotopes and a variety of other toxins from the soil,
water, and air.[56]

### Weed control

Hemp crops are tall, have thick foliage, and can be planted densely, and
thus can be grown as a [smother crop](smother_crop "wikilink") to kill
tough weeds.[57] Using hemp this way can help farmers avoid the use of
herbicides, gain [organic
certification](organic_certification "wikilink"), and gain the benefits
of [crop rotation](crop_rotation "wikilink"). However, due to the
plant's rapid and dense growth characteristics, some jurisdictions
consider hemp a prohibited and noxious weed, much like [Scotch
Broom](Cytisus_scoparius "wikilink").[58]

<File:Hanflabyrinth> Berlin 2009 - 40.jpg\|The dense growth of hemp
helps kill weeds, even [thistle](thistle "wikilink").

### Biofuels

![](Biodiesel.JPG "Biodiesel.JPG")

[Biodiesel](Biodiesel "wikilink") can be made from the oils in hemp
seeds and stalks; this product is sometimes called "hempoline".[59]
[Alcohol fuel](Alcohol_fuel "wikilink") (ethanol or, less commonly,
methanol) can be made by fermenting the whole plant.

Filtered hemp oil can be used directly to power [diesel
engines](diesel_engine "wikilink"). In 1892, [Rudolf
Diesel](Rudolf_Diesel "wikilink") invented the diesel engine, which he
intended to power "by a variety of fuels, especially vegetable and seed
oils, which earlier were used for [oil lamps](oil_lamp "wikilink"), i.e.
the [Argand lamp](Argand_lamp "wikilink")."[60][61][62]

Production of vehicle fuel from hemp is very small. Commercial
[biodiesel](biodiesel "wikilink") and [biogas](biogas "wikilink") is
typically produced from cereals, coconuts, palm seeds, and cheaper raw
materials like garbage, wastewater, dead plant and animal material,
animal [feces](feces "wikilink") and kitchen waste.[63]

### Energy Storage

There have been some studies and experiments with promising results in
which waste fiber from industrial hemp was used as a component in
supercapacitors for energy storage. Dr. David Mitlin,[64] Of Clarkson
University created a cheaper version, made of hemp, for graphene. The
hemp supercapacitors created by Mitlin have been able to store 12
watt-hours of energy per Kg. This is over 2x as high as regular graphene
supercapacitors, and cheaper to build. This new tech is promising and
with high chances it can change the way we store energy nowadays.

## Processing

Separation of hurd and bast fiber is known as
[decortication](Decorticator "wikilink"). Traditionally, hemp stalks
would be water-[retted](Retting "wikilink") first before the fibers were
beaten off the inner [hurd](Hemp_hurds "wikilink") by hand, a process
known as [scutching](scutching "wikilink"). As mechanical technology
evolved, separating the fiber from the core was accomplished by crushing
rollers and brush rollers, or by hammer-milling, wherein a mechanical
hammer mechanism beats the hemp against a screen until hurd, smaller
bast fibers, and dust fall through the screen. After the [Marijuana Tax
Act](Marihuana_Tax_Act_of_1937 "wikilink") was implemented in 1938, the
technology for separating the fibers from the core remained "frozen in
time". Recently, new high-speed kinematic decortication has come about,
capable of separating hemp into three streams; bast fiber, hurd, and
green microfiber.

Only in 1997, did Ireland, parts of the Commonwealth and other countries
begin to legally grow [industrial hemp](industrial_hemp "wikilink")
again. Iterations of the 1930s [decorticator](decorticator "wikilink")
have been met with limited success, along with steam explosion and
chemical processing known as [thermomechanical
pulping](Thermo_mechanical_pulp "wikilink").

## Cultivation

![](Cannab2_new.png "Cannab2_new.png")

Hemp is usually planted between March and May in the northern
hemisphere, between September and November in the southern
hemisphere.[65] It matures in about three to four months.[66]

Millennia of [selective breeding](selective_breeding "wikilink") have
resulted in [varieties](cultivar "wikilink") that display a wide range
of traits; e.g. suited for a particular environments/latitudes,
producing different ratios and compositions of terpenoids and
cannabinoids (CBD, THC, CBG, CBC, CBN...etc.), fibre quality, oil/seed
yield, etc. Hemp grown for fiber is planted closely, resulting in tall,
slender plants with long fibers.

The use of industrial hemp plant and its cultivation was commonplace
until the 1900s when it was associated with its genetic sibling a.k.a.
Drug-Type Cannabis species (which contain higher levels of psychoactive
THC). [Influential groups misconstrued
hemp](Legal_history_of_cannabis_in_the_United_States "wikilink") as a
dangerous "drug",[67] even though hemp is not a recreational drug and
has the potential to be a sustainable and profitable crop for many
farmers due to hemp's medical, structural and dietary uses.[68][69]

In the United States, the public's perception of hemp as marijuana has
blocked hemp from becoming a useful crop and product,"[70] in spite of
its vital importance prior to World War II.[71] Ideally, according to
Britain's [Department for Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs](Department_for_Environment,_Food_and_Rural_Affairs "wikilink"),
the herb should be desiccated and harvested towards the end of
flowering. This early cropping reduces the seed yield but improves the
fiber yield and quality.[72] In these strains of industrial hemp\* the
[tetrahydrocannabinol](tetrahydrocannabinol "wikilink") (THC) content
would have been very low.[73]

The seeds are sown with grain drills or other conventional seeding
equipment to a depth of 1.27 to 2.54 cm. Greater seeding depths result
in increased weed competition. Nitrogen should not be placed with the
seed, but phosphate may be tolerated. The soil should have available 89
to 135 kg/ha of nitrogen, 46 kg/ha phosphorus, 67 kg/ha potassium, and
17 kg/ha sulfur. Organic fertilizers such as manure are one of the best
methods of weed control.[74]

### Cultivars

In contrast to cannabis for medical use, varieties grown for fiber and
seed have less than 0.3% THC and are unsuitable for producing hashish
and marijuana.[75] Present in industrial hemp,
[cannabidiol](cannabidiol "wikilink") is a major constituent among some
560 compounds found in hemp.[76]

*Cannabis sativa* L. subsp. *sativa* var. *sativa* is the variety grown
for industrial use, while *C. sativa* subsp. *indica* generally has poor
fiber quality and female buds from this variety are primarily used for
recreational and medicinal purposes. The major differences between the
two types of plants are the appearance, and the amount of
Δ<sup>9</sup>-[tetrahydrocannabinol](tetrahydrocannabinol "wikilink")
(THC) secreted in a resinous mixture by
[epidermal](Epidermis_(botany) "wikilink") hairs called glandular
[trichomes](trichomes "wikilink"), although they can also be
distinguished genetically.[77][78] Oilseed and fiber varieties of
*Cannabis* approved for industrial hemp production produce only minute
amounts of this psychoactive drug, not enough for any physical or
psychological effects. Typically, hemp contains below 0.3% THC, while
cultivars of *Cannabis* grown for medicinal or recreational use can
contain anywhere from 2% to over 20%.[79]

<File:Cannabis> Sativa Querschnitt.JPG\|alt=longitudinal section
photo\|*[Cannabis sativa](Cannabis_sativa "wikilink")* stem
<File:USO-xx> and Zolotoniski-xx hemp strains 010.jpg\|alt=low-angle
photo-shot\|Hemp strains USO-xx and Zolotoniski-xx

### Harvesting

Smallholder plots are usually harvested by hand. The plants are cut at 2
to 3 cm above the soil and left on the ground to dry. Mechanical
harvesting is now common, using specially adapted cutter-binders or
simpler cutters.

The cut hemp is laid in swathes to dry for up to four days. This was
traditionally followed by *[retting](retting "wikilink")*, either water
retting (the bundled hemp floats in water) or dew retting (the hemp
remains on the ground and is affected by the moisture in dew and by
molds and [bacterial](bacterial "wikilink") action).

<File:Nutzhanf> - getrennte Ernte.webm\|Harvesting industrial hemp
(Cannabis sativa) - This is a separate harvest for a different form of
processing: The upper part of the plant with the leaves will be
collected for cold pressing, while the lower part remains for producing
fiber and initially it is left on the field.
<File:Recoltechv.jpg%7CIndustrial> hempseed harvesting machine in
[France](France "wikilink") <File:USO-xx> and Zolotoniski-xx hemp
strains 007.jpg [File:Récolte](File:Récolte) chanvre1.jpg
<File:Saint-Flavy> (Aube) culture du Chanvre.JPG
USO-xx_and_Zolotoniski-xx_hemp_strains_019.jpg
<File:Hempharvesting2.jpg%7CHemp> being harvested

### Location and crop rotation

For profitable hemp farming, particularly deep,
[humus](humus "wikilink")-rich, nutrient-rich soil with controlled water
flow is preferable. Waterlogged acidic, compressed or extremely light
(sandy) soils primarily affect the early development of plants. Steep
and high altitudes of more than 400 m above sea level are best avoided.
Hemp is relatively insensitive to cold temperatures and can withstand
frost down to −5 °C. Seeds can germinate down to 1–3 °C. Hemp needs a
lot of heat, so earlier varieties come to maturation. The water
requirement is 300–500 l/kg dry matter. This is around 1/14th that of
cotton, which takes between 7,000 and 29,000 l/kg, according to WWF.
Roots can grow up to 3 feet into the soil and use water from deeper soil
layers.

Hemp benefits crops grown after it. So, it is generally grown before
winter cereals. Advantageous changes are high weed suppression, soil
loosening by the large hemp root system, and the positive effect on soil
[tilth](tilth "wikilink"). Since hemp is very self-compatible, it can
also be grown several years in a row in the same fields (monoculture).

### Diseases

Hemp plants can be vulnerable to various
[pathogens](pathogen "wikilink"), including
[bacteria](bacteria "wikilink"), [fungi](fungi "wikilink"),
[nematodes](nematodes "wikilink"), [viruses](viruses "wikilink") and
other miscellaneous pathogens. Such diseases often lead to reduced fiber
quality, stunted growth, and death of the plant. These diseases rarely
affect the yield of a hemp field, so hemp production is not
traditionally dependent on the use of pesticides.

### Environmental impact

Hemp is considered by a 1998 study in *[Environmental
Economics](Environmental_Economics "wikilink")* to be [environmentally
friendly](environmentally_friendly "wikilink") due to a decrease of
[land use](land_use "wikilink") and other environmental impacts,
indicating a possible decrease of [ecological
footprint](ecological_footprint "wikilink") in a US context compared to
typical benchmarks.[80] A 2010 study, however, that compared the
production of [paper](paper "wikilink") specifically from hemp and
[eucalyptus](eucalyptus "wikilink") concluded that "industrial hemp
presents higher environmental impacts than eucalyptus paper"; however,
the article also highlights that "there is scope for improving
industrial hemp paper production".[81] Hemp is also claimed to require
few [pesticides](pesticide "wikilink") and no herbicides, and it has
been called a [carbon negative](carbon_negative "wikilink") raw
material.[82][83] Results indicate that high yield of hemp may require
high total nutrient levels (field plus fertilizer nutrients) similar to
a high yielding wheat crop.[84]

## Producers

The world-leading producer of hemp is [China](China "wikilink"), which
produces more than 70% of the world output. [France](France "wikilink")
ranks second with about a quarter of the world production. Smaller
production occurs in the rest of [Europe](Europe "wikilink"),
[Chile](Chile "wikilink"), and [North Korea](North_Korea "wikilink").
Over 30 countries produce industrial hemp, including
[Australia](Australia "wikilink"), [Austria](Austria "wikilink"),
[Canada](Canada "wikilink"), Chile, [China](China "wikilink"),
[Denmark](Denmark "wikilink"), [Egypt](Egypt "wikilink"),
[Finland](Finland "wikilink"), [Germany](Germany "wikilink"),
[Greece](Greece "wikilink"),[85] [Hungary](Hungary "wikilink"),
[India](India "wikilink"), [Italy](Italy "wikilink"),
[Japan](Japan "wikilink"), [Korea](Korea "wikilink"),
[Netherlands](Netherlands "wikilink"), [New
Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink"), [Poland](Poland "wikilink"),
[Portugal](Portugal "wikilink"), [Romania](Romania "wikilink"),
[Russia](Russia "wikilink"), [Slovenia](Slovenia "wikilink"),
[Spain](Spain "wikilink"), [Sweden](Sweden "wikilink"),
[Switzerland](Switzerland "wikilink"), [Thailand](Thailand "wikilink"),
[Turkey](Turkey "wikilink"), the [United
Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink") and
[Ukraine](Ukraine "wikilink").[86][87]

The United Kingdom and Germany resumed commercial production in the
1990s. British production is mostly used as bedding for
[horses](horse "wikilink"); other uses are under development. Companies
in Canada, the UK, the United States, and Germany, among many others,
process hemp seed into a growing range of [food](food "wikilink")
products and [cosmetics](cosmetics "wikilink"); many traditional growing
countries continue to produce [textile](textile "wikilink")-grade fibre.

![](Hemp_bunch-dried_out_PNr°0062.jpg "fig:Hemp_bunch-dried_out_PNr°0062.jpg")\]\]
Air-dried stem yields in Ontario have from 1998 and onward ranged from
2.6–14.0 tonnes of dry, retted stalks per hectare (1–5.5 t/ac) at 12%
moisture. Yields in Kent County, have averaged 8.75 t/ha (3.5 t/ac).
Northern Ontario crops averaged 6.1 t/ha (2.5 t/ac) in 1998. Statistic
for the European Union for 2008 to 2010 say that the average yield of
hemp straw has varied between 6.3 and 7.3 ton per ha.[88][89] Only a
part of that is bast fiber. Around one tonne of bast fiber and 2–3
tonnes of core material can be decorticated from 3–4 tonnes of
good-quality, dry-retted straw. For an annual yield of this level is it
in Ontario recommended to add nitrogen (N):70–110 kg/ha,
[phosphate](phosphate "wikilink") (P<sub>2</sub>O<sub>5</sub>): up to
80 kg/ha and [potash](potash "wikilink") (K<sub>2</sub>O):
40–90 kg/ha.[90] The average yield of dry hemp stalks in Europe was 6
ton/ha (2.4 ton/ac) in 2001 and 2002.[91]

[FAO](Food_and_Agriculture_Organization_of_the_United_Nations "wikilink")
argue that an optimum yield of hemp fiber is more than 2 tonnes per ha,
while average yields are around 650 kg/ha.[92]

### Australia

In the Australian states of [Tasmania](Tasmania "wikilink"),
[Victoria](Victoria_(Australia) "wikilink"),
[Queensland](Queensland "wikilink"), [Western
Australia](Western_Australia "wikilink"), [New South
Wales](New_South_Wales "wikilink"), and most recently, [South
Australia](South_Australia "wikilink"), the state governments have
issued licences to grow hemp for industrial use. The first to initiate
modern research into the potential of cannabis was the state of
Tasmania, which pioneered the licensing of hemp during the early 1990s.
The state of Victoria was an early adopter in 1998, and has reissued the
regulation in 2008.[93]

Queensland has allowed industrial production under licence since
2002,[94] where the issuance is controlled under the Drugs Misuse Act
1986.[95] Western Australia enabled the cultivation, harvest and
processing of hemp under its Industrial Hemp Act 2004,[96] New South
Wales now issues licences[97] under a law, the Hemp Industry Regulations
Act 2008 (No 58), that came into effect as of 6 November 2008.[98] Most
recently, South Australia legalized industrial hemp under South
Australia’s Industrial Hemp Act 2017, which commenced on 12 November
2017.[99]

### Canada

Commercial production (including cultivation) of industrial hemp has
been permitted in Canada since 1998 under licenses and authorization
issued by Health Canada (9,725 ha in 2004, 5450 ha in 2009).[100]

In the early 1990s, industrial hemp agriculture in North America began
with the [Hemp Awareness
Committee](University_of_Manitoba_Hemp_Awareness_Committee "wikilink")
at the [University of Manitoba](University_of_Manitoba "wikilink"). The
Committee worked with the provincial government to get research and
development assistance and was able to obtain test plot permits from the
[Canadian government](Canadian_government "wikilink"). Their efforts led
to the legalization of [industrial hemp](industrial_hemp "wikilink")
(hemp with only minute amounts of
[tetrahydrocannabinol](tetrahydrocannabinol "wikilink")) in
[Canada](Canada "wikilink") and the first harvest in 1998.[101][102]

In 2017, the cultivated area for hemp in the [Prairie
provinces](Prairie_provinces "wikilink") include
[Saskatchewan](Saskatchewan "wikilink") with more than ,
[Alberta](Alberta "wikilink") with , and [Manitoba](Manitoba "wikilink")
with .[103] Canadian hemp is cultivated mostly for its food value as
hulled hemp seeds, hemp oils, and hemp protein powders, with only a
small fraction devoted to production of hemp fiber used for construction
and insulation.[104]

### France

[France](France "wikilink") is Europe's biggest producer (and the
world's second largest producer) with cultivated.[105] 70–80% of the
hemp fibre produced in 2003 was used for specialty pulp for cigarette
papers and technical applications. About 15% was used in the automotive
sector, and 5-6% was used for insulation mats. About 95% of hurds were
used as animal bedding, while almost 5% was used in the building
sector.[106] In 2010/2011, a total of was cultivated with hemp in the
[EU](European_Union "wikilink"), a decline compared with previous
year.[107][108]

<File:Industrialhemp.jpg%7CIndustrial> hemp production in France
<File:La> Roche Jagu chanvre 2.JPG\|A hemp maze in France

### Russia and Ukraine

![](Cannabis_harvesting_(USSR,_1956).png "Cannabis_harvesting_(USSR,_1956).png")

From the 1950s to the 1980s, the [Soviet Union](Soviet_Union "wikilink")
was the world's largest producer of hemp ( in 1970). The main production
areas were in [Ukraine](Ukraine "wikilink"),[109] the
[Kursk](Kursk "wikilink") and [Orel](Oryol "wikilink") regions of
[Russia](Russia "wikilink"), and near the [Polish](Poland "wikilink")
border. Since its inception in 1931, the Hemp Breeding Department at the
Institute of [Bast](Bast_fiber "wikilink") Crops in
[Hlukhiv](Hlukhiv "wikilink") (Glukhov), Ukraine, has been one of the
world's largest centers for developing new hemp varieties, focusing on
improving fiber quality, per-hectare yields, and low THC
content.[110][111]

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the commercial cultivation of
hemp declined sharply. However, at least an estimated 2.5 million acres
of hemp grow wild in the Russian Far East and the Black Sea
regions.[112]

### United Kingdom

In the United Kingdom, cultivation licences are issued by the [Home
Office](Home_Office "wikilink") under the [Misuse of Drugs Act
1971](Misuse_of_Drugs_Act_1971 "wikilink"). When grown for nondrug
purposes, hemp is referred to as industrial hemp, and a common product
is fibre for use in a wide variety of products, as well as the seed for
nutritional aspects and the oil. [Feral hemp](Feral_hemp "wikilink") or
ditch weed is usually a naturalized fibre or oilseed strain of
*Cannabis* that has escaped from cultivation and is self-seeding.[113]

### United States

As of December 2018, hemp is federally legal to grow again in the United
States. The government passed the Hemp Farming Act of 2018, part of the
[2018 Farm Bill](2018_United_States_farm_bill "wikilink")[114] signed by
[President](President_of_the_United_States "wikilink") [Donald
Trump](Donald_Trump "wikilink") on 20 December 2018.[115] This bill
changed hemp from a controlled substance to an agricultural commodity,
legalizing hemp federally, which made it easier for farmers to get
production licenses, get loans to grow hemp, and allowed them to get
federal crop insurance.[116] Some states still consider it illegal to
grow hemp, but 41 states have begun the process to make hemp legal to
grow at the state level, as of 2019.[117]

The process to legalize hemp cultivation began in 2009, when Oregon
began approving licenses for industrial hemp.[118] Then, in 2013, after
the legalization of marijuana, several farmers in Colorado planted and
harvested several acres of hemp, bringing in the first hemp crop in the
United States in over half a century.[119] After that, the federal
government created a Hemp Farming Pilot Program as a part of the
Agricultural Act of 2014.[120] This program allowed institutions of
higher education and state agricultural departments to begin growing
hemp without the consent of the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA). [Hemp
production in Kentucky](Hemp_in_Kentucky "wikilink"), formerly the
United States' leading producer, resumed in 2014.[121] [Hemp production
in North Carolina](Hemp_in_North_Carolina "wikilink") resumed in
2017,[122] and in Washington State the same year.[123] By the end of
2017, at least 34 U.S. states had industrial hemp programs. In 2018,
[New York](New_York_(state) "wikilink") began taking strides in
industrial hemp production, along with hemp research pilot programs at
[Cornell University](Cornell_University "wikilink"), [Binghamton
University](Binghamton_University "wikilink") and [SUNY
Morrisville](SUNY_Morrisville "wikilink").[124]

As of 2015 the hemp industry estimated that annual sales of hemp
products were around US$600 million annually; hemp seeds have been the
major force driving this growth.[125]

Despite this progress, hemp businesses in the US have had difficulties
expanding as they have faced challenges in traditional marketing and
sales approaches. According to a case study done by *Forbes*, hemp
businesses and startups have had difficulty marketing and selling
non-psychoactive hemp products, as some online advertising platforms and
financial institutions do not distinguish between hemp and
marijuana.[126]

## History

Hemp is possibly one of the earliest plants to be cultivated.[127][128]
An archeological site in the [Oki Islands](Oki_Islands "wikilink") near
Japan contained cannabis [achenes](achene "wikilink") from about
8000 BC, probably signifying use of the plant.[129] Hemp use
archaeologically dates back to the [Neolithic
Age](Neolithic_Age "wikilink") in China, with hemp fiber imprints found
on [Yangshao culture](Yangshao_culture "wikilink") pottery dating from
the [5th millennium BC](5th_millennium_BC "wikilink").[130][131] The
Chinese later used hemp to make clothes, shoes, ropes, and an early form
of [paper](paper "wikilink").[132] The classical Greek historian
[Herodotus](Herodotus "wikilink") (ca. 480 BC) reported that the
inhabitants of [Scythia](Scythia "wikilink") would often inhale the
vapors of hemp-seed smoke, both as ritual and for their own pleasurable
recreation.[133]

Textile expert [Elizabeth Wayland
Barber](Elizabeth_Wayland_Barber "wikilink") summarizes the historical
evidence that *Cannabis sativa*, "grew and was known in the Neolithic
period all across the northern latitudes, from Europe (Germany,
Switzerland, Austria, Romania, Ukraine) to East Asia (Tibet and China),"
but, "textile use of Cannabis sativa does not surface for certain in the
West until relatively late, namely the Iron Age."[134] "I strongly
suspect, however, that what catapulted hemp to sudden fame and fortune
as a cultigen and caused it to spread rapidly westwards in the first
millennium B.C. was the spread of the habit of pot-smoking from
somewhere in south-central Asia, where the drug-bearing variety of the
plant originally occurred. The linguistic evidence strongly supports
this theory, both as to time and direction of spread and as to
cause."[135]

Jews living in
[Palestine](Palestine_(region)#Classical_antiquity "wikilink") in the
2nd century were familiar with the cultivation of hemp, as witnessed by
a reference to it in the [Mishna](Mishna "wikilink")
(*[Kil'ayim](kil'ayim_(Talmud) "wikilink")* 2:5) as a variety of plant,
along with [Arum](Arum "wikilink"), that sometimes takes as many as
three years to grow from a seedling. In [late
medieval](Late_Middle_Ages "wikilink")
[Germany](Holy_Roman_Empire "wikilink") and
[Italy](Italy_in_the_Middle_Ages "wikilink"), hemp was employed in
cooked dishes, as filling in [pies](pie "wikilink") and
[tortes](torte "wikilink"), or boiled in a [soup](soup "wikilink").[136]
Hemp in later Europe was mainly cultivated for its fibers and was used
for ropes on many ships, including those of [Christopher
Columbus](Christopher_Columbus "wikilink"). The use of hemp as a cloth
was centered largely in the countryside, with higher quality
[textiles](textiles "wikilink") being available in the towns.
![](Cannabissativadior.jpg "fig:Cannabissativadior.jpg")*from*[Vienna
Dioscurides](Vienna_Dioscurides "wikilink")'', 512 AD.\]\] The Spaniards
brought hemp to the Americas and cultivated it in
[Chile](Chile "wikilink") starting about 1545.[137] Similar attempts
were made in Peru, Colombia, and Mexico, but only in Chile did the crop
find success.[138] In July 1605, [Samuel
Champlain](Samuel_Champlain "wikilink") reported the use of grass and
hemp clothing by the (Wampanoag) people of Cape Cod and the (Nauset)
people of Plymouth Bay told him they harvested hemp in their region
where it grew wild to a height of 4 to 5 ft. [139] In May 1607, "hempe"
was among the crops Gabriel Archer observed being cultivated by the
natives at the main [Powhatan](Powhatan "wikilink") village, where
[Richmond, Virginia](Richmond,_Virginia "wikilink") is now
situated;[140] and in 1613, [Samuell Argall](Samuell_Argall "wikilink")
reported wild hemp "better than that in England" growing along the
shores of the upper [Potomac](Potomac_River "wikilink"). As early as
1619, the first Virginia [House of
Burgesses](House_of_Burgesses "wikilink") passed an Act requiring all
planters in Virginia to sow "both English and Indian" hemp on their
plantations.[141] The [Puritans](Puritans "wikilink") are first known to
have cultivated hemp in [New England](New_England "wikilink") in
1645.[142]

### United States

George Washington pushed for the growth of hemp as it was a [cash
crop](cash_crop "wikilink") commonly used to make rope and fabric. In
May 1765 he noted in his diary about the sowing of seeds each day until
mid-April. Then he recounts the harvest in October which he grew 27
bushels that year.

It is sometimes supposed that an excerpt from Washington's diary, which
reads "Began to the Male from the Female hemp at Do.&—rather too late"
is evidence that he was trying to grow female plants for the
[THC](THC "wikilink") found in the flowers. However, the editorial
remark accompanying the diary states that "This may arise from their
\[the male\] being coarser, and the stalks larger"[143] In subsequent
days, he describes soaking the hemp [144] (to make the fibers usable)
and harvesting the seeds,[145] suggesting that he was growing hemp for
industrial purposes, not recreational.

George Washington also imported the Indian Hemp plant from Asia, which
was used for fiber and, by some growers, for intoxicating resin
production. In a 1796 letter to William Pearce who managed the plants
for him, Washington says, "What was done with the Indian Hemp plant from
last summer? It ought, all of it, to be sown again; that not only a
stock of seed sufficient for my own purposes might have been raised, but
to have disseminated seed to others; as it is more valuable than common
hemp."[146][147]

Other presidents known to have farmed hemp for alternative purposes
include [Thomas Jefferson](Thomas_Jefferson "wikilink"),[148] [James
Madison](James_Madison "wikilink"), [James
Monroe](James_Monroe "wikilink"), [Andrew
Jackson](Andrew_Jackson "wikilink"), [Zachary
Taylor](Zachary_Taylor "wikilink"), and [Franklin
Pierce](Franklin_Pierce "wikilink"). [149]

Historically, hemp production had made up a significant portion of
[antebellum](History_of_the_United_States_(1789–1849) "wikilink")
Kentucky's economy. Before the [American Civil
War](American_Civil_War "wikilink"), many slaves worked on
[plantations](plantation_economy "wikilink") producing hemp.[150]

In 1937, the [Marihuana Tax Act of
1937](Marihuana_Tax_Act_of_1937 "wikilink") was passed in the United
States, levying a tax on anyone who dealt commercially in cannabis,
hemp, or marijuana. The passing of the Act to destroy the U.S. hemp
industry has been disputed to involve businessmen [Andrew
Mellon](Andrew_Mellon "wikilink"), [Randolph
Hearst](Randolph_Hearst "wikilink") and the [Du Pont
family](Du_Pont_family "wikilink").[151][152][153]

One claim is that Hearst believed that his extensive timber holdings
were threatened by the invention of the
[decorticator](decorticator "wikilink") that he feared would allow hemp
to become a cheap substitute for the [paper pulp](paper_pulp "wikilink")
used for newspaper.[154][155] Historical research indicates this fear
was unfounded because improvements of the
[decorticators](decorticator "wikilink") in the 1930s – machines that
separated the fibers from the hemp stem – could not make hemp fiber a
cheaper substitute for fibers from other sources. Further, decorticators
did not perform satisfactorily in commercial production.[156][157]

Another claim is that Mellon, [Secretary of the
Treasury](Secretary_of_the_Treasury "wikilink") and the wealthiest man
in America at that time, had invested heavily in
[DuPont](DuPont "wikilink")'s new synthetic fiber,
[nylon](nylon "wikilink"), and believed that the replacement of the
traditional resource, hemp, was integral to the new product's
success.[158][159][160][161][162][163][164][165] The company DuPont and
many industrial historians dispute a link between
[nylon](nylon "wikilink") and hemp, nylon became immediately a scarce
commodity. Nylon had characteristics that could be used for
[toothbrushes](toothbrushes "wikilink") (sold from 1938) and very thin
nylon fiber could compete with [silk](silk "wikilink") and
[rayon](rayon "wikilink") in various textiles normally not produced from
hemp fiber, such as very thin stockings for
women.[166][167][168][169][170]

While the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 had just been signed into law, the
United States Department of Agriculture lifted the tax on hemp
cultivation during WW II.[171] Before WW II, the U.S. Navy used Jute and
Manila Hemp from the Philippines and Indonesia for the cordage on their
ships. During the war, Japan cut off those supply lines.[172] America
was forced to turn inward and revitalize the cultivation of Hemp on U.S.
soils.

Hemp was used extensively by the United States during World War II to
make uniforms, canvas, and rope.[173] Much of the hemp used was
cultivated in [Kentucky](Kentucky "wikilink") and the
[Midwest](Midwest "wikilink"). During World War II, the U.S. produced a
short 1942 film, *[Hemp for Victory](Hemp_for_Victory "wikilink")*,
promoting hemp as a necessary crop to win the war.[174] U.S. farmers
participated in the campaign to increase U.S. hemp production to 36,000
acres in 1942.[175] This increase amounted to more than 20 times the
production in 1941 before the war effort.[176]

<File:Hemp> for Victory 1942.webm\|*[Hemp for
Victory](Hemp_for_Victory "wikilink")*, a short documentary produced by
the [United States Department of
Agriculture](United_States_Department_of_Agriculture "wikilink") during
[World War II](World_War_II "wikilink") <File:KY> War Board Letter to
Joe Burton, hemp farmer.jpg\|1942 [United States Department of
Agriculture](United_States_Department_of_Agriculture "wikilink") War
Board Letter of appreciation to Joe "Daddy Burt" Burton, a Kentucky hemp
farmer for his support of the [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink")
*Hemp for Victory* campaign.[177] <File:Joe> Burton Kentucky hemp farmer
with hemp.jpg\|Joe "Daddy Burt" Burton, a recognized top Kentucky hemp
farmer with harvested hemp, 1942. Photo by USDA War Board - Lexington,
KY[178] <File:Producer> of marihuana.jpg\|United States "Marihuana"
production permit. In the United States, hemp cultivation is [legally
prohibited](Legal_issues_of_cannabis "wikilink"), but during [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink") farmers were encouraged to grow hemp for
cordage, to replace [Manila hemp](Manila_hemp "wikilink") previously
obtained from [Japanese](Japan "wikilink")-controlled areas. The U.S.
government produced a film explaining the uses of hemp, called *[Hemp
for Victory](Hemp_for_Victory "wikilink")*.

### Historical cultivation

Hemp has been grown for millennia in Asia and the Middle East for its
fibre. Commercial production of hemp in the West took off in the
eighteenth century, but was grown in the sixteenth century in eastern
England.[179] Because of colonial and naval expansion of the era,
economies needed large quantities of hemp for rope and
[oakum](oakum "wikilink"). In the early 1940s, world production of hemp
fiber ranged from 250 000 to 350 000 metric tonnes,
[Russia](Russia "wikilink") was the biggest producer.[180]

In Western Europe, the cultivation of hemp was not legally banned by the
1930s, but the commercial cultivation stopped by then, due to decreased
demand compared to increasingly popular artificial fibers.[181]
Speculation about the potential for commercial cultivation of hemp in
large quantities has been criticized due to successful competition from
other fibers for many products. The world production of hemp fiber fell
from over 300,000 metric tons 1961 to about 75,000 metric tons in the
early 1990s and has after that been stable at that level.[182]

#### Japan

![](Kamidana.jpg "fig:Kamidana.jpg") with rope made of hemp\]\]

In [Japan](Japan "wikilink"), hemp was historically used as paper and a
fiber crop. There is archaeological evidence cannabis was used for
clothing and the seeds were eaten in Japan back to the [Jōmon
period](Jōmon_period "wikilink") (10,000 to 300 BC). Many
[Kimono](Kimono "wikilink") designs portray hemp, or *asa* (), as a
beautiful plant. In 1948, marijuana was restricted as a narcotic drug.
The ban on marijuana imposed by the United States authorities was alien
to Japanese culture, as the drug had never been widely used in Japan
before. Though these laws against marijuana are some of the world's
strictest, allowing five years imprisonment for possession of the drug,
they exempt hemp growers, whose crop is used to make robes for [Buddhist
monks](Buddhist_monk "wikilink") and [loincloths](mawashi "wikilink")
for [Sumo wrestlers](Sumo_wrestler "wikilink"). Because marijuana use in
Japan has doubled in the past decade, these exemptions have recently
been called into question.[183]

#### Portugal

The cultivation of hemp in Portuguese lands began around the fourteenth
century. The raw material was used for the preparation of rope and plugs
for the Portuguese ships. Portugal also utilized its colonies to support
its hemp supply, including in certain parts of Brazil.[184]

In order to recover the ailing Portuguese naval fleet after the
Restoration of Independence in 1640, King John IV put a renewed emphasis
on the growing of hemp. He ordered the creation of the Royal Linen and
Hemp Factory in the town of Torre de Moncorvo to increase production and
support the effort.[185]

In 1971, the cultivation of hemp became illegal, and the production was
substantially reduced. Because of EU regulations 1308/70, 619/71 and
1164/89, this law was revoked (for some certified seed varieties).[186]

## See also

-   [Cannabis flower essential
    oil](Cannabis_flower_essential_oil "wikilink")
-   [Fiber rope](Fiber_rope "wikilink")
-   [Hemp Industries
    Association](Hemp_Industries_Association "wikilink")
-   [Industrial Hemp Farming Act of
    2009](Industrial_Hemp_Farming_Act_of_2009 "wikilink")
-   [International Year of Natural
    Fibres](International_Year_of_Natural_Fibres "wikilink")
-   [Natural fibre](Natural_fibre "wikilink")
-   [Plant textiles](Fabric#Plant_textiles "wikilink")
-   *[The Emperor Wears No
    Clothes](The_Emperor_Wears_No_Clothes "wikilink")* (book)
-   [Flax seed](Flax_seed "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Industrial Hemp in the United States: Status and Market Potential
    (www.ers.usda.gov)](https://web.archive.org/web/20150518101928/http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/ages/ages001e.aspx)

-

[01](Category:Hemp "wikilink") [Category:Articles containing video
clips](Category:Articles_containing_video_clips "wikilink")
[Category:Biofuels](Category:Biofuels "wikilink") [Category:Fiber
plants](Category:Fiber_plants "wikilink")
[Category:Herbs](Category:Herbs "wikilink") [Category:Non-food
crops](Category:Non-food_crops "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29] [1](https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/fdc-app.html#/?query=ndbNumber:12012)

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38] NNFCC. ["NNFCC Project Factsheet: Guide to Building with Hemp-Lime
Composites, NNFCC
07-001"](http://www.nnfcc.co.uk/publications/nnfcc-project-factsheet-guide-to-building-with-hemp-lime-composites-nnfcc-07-001),
"[National Non-Food Crops
Centre](National_Non-Food_Crops_Centre "wikilink")", Retrieved on 16
February 2011

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46] Allin, Steve. *Building with Hemp*, Seed Press, 2012, . (p. 95, 2nd
Edition).

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55] NNFCC. In the US, pet manufacturers use hemp in dog and cat
bedding. ["Crop Factsheet:
Hemp"](http://www.nnfcc.co.uk/metadot/index.pl?id=7199;isa=DBRow;op=show;dbview_id=2457)
, *[National Non-Food Crops
Centre](National_Non-Food_Crops_Centre "wikilink")*, 9 June 2008.
Retrieved on 6 May 2009

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64] [David Mitlin](https://www.clarkson.edu/people/david-mitlin)

[65] [What Farmers Need to Know About Growing
Hemp(https://www.agriculture.com)](https://www.agriculture.com/news/crops/what-farmers-need-to-know-about-growing-hemp)\|date=22
July 2019 }}

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70] This paper begins with a history of hemp use and then describes how
hemp was constructed as a dangerous crop in the U.S. The paper then
discusses the potential of hemp as an alternative crop.

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79] [Hemp and Marijuana: Myths &
Realities](http://www.naihc.org/hemp_information/content/hemp.mj.html)
written by David P. West, Ph.D. for the North American Industrial Hemp
Council

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108] [Jordbruksverket: 2.1–2.3, 2.5 Marknadssituationen för spannmål,
oljeväxter, proteingrödor, ris,2011-03-10, (Swedish Board of
Agriculture, Report from an expert group in the European Union about the
market situation for a number of agricultural products. Published only
in
Swedish)](http://www.sjv.se/amnesomraden/handel/politikochframtid/eusjordbrukspolitik/spannmal/nyhetsbrevomeukommittemotenspannmalmm/2011protokoll/20110310.5.4bdd0ace12e454f491d80002616.html)

[109]

[110] [Hemp will help Ukraine to grow
wealthy](http://news2000.org.ua/print?a=%2Fpaper%2F5463)

[111] [Interview with Dr. V. G. Virovets, the head of the Hemp Breeding
Department at the Institute of Bast
Crops](http://mojo.calyx.net/~olsen/HEMP/IHA/jiha5111.html) (1998)

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[130]

[131] Barber, E. J. W. (1992). *Prehistoric Textiles: The Development of
Cloth in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages with Special Reference to the
Aegean*. Princeton University Press. p. 17.

[132]

[133]

[134] Barber, E. J. W. (1992). *Prehistoric Textiles: The Development of
Cloth in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages with Special Reference to the
Aegean*. Princeton University Press. p. 18.

[135] Barber (1992). p. 19.

[136] *Regional Cuisines of Medieval Europe: A Book of Essays* (2002),
edited by Melitta Weiss Adamson, , pg. 98, 166

[137]

[138]

[139] Champlain, Samuel, Henry P. Biggar. 1929. The Works of Samuel de
Champlain, vol 1. Toronto: Champlain Society. pp. 341–56.

[140] Gabriel Archer, *A Relatyon of the Discoverie of Our River...*,
printed in *Archaeologia Americana* 1860, p. 44. [William
Strachey](William_Strachey "wikilink") (1612) records a native
([Powhatan](Powhatan "wikilink")) name for hemp (*weihkippeis*).

[141] [Proceedings of the Virginia Assembly,
1619](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/etcbin/jamestown-browse?id=J1036) ,
cf. the 1633 Act: [*Hening's Statutes at Large*, p.
218](http://vagenweb.org/hening/vol01-09.htm)

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

[147]

[148] Bear, James A. Jr., and Lucia C. Stanton, eds. Jefferson's
Memorandum Books: Accounts, with Legal Records and Miscellany,
1767–1826. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997, 1:383.

[149] Robinson, Rowan. The Great Book of Hemp: The Complete Guide to the
Environmental, Commercial, and Medicinal Uses of the World's Most
Extraordinary Plant. Rochester, VT. Park Street Press, 2010. Chapter
5:129-135. Print

[150] [James F. Hopkins, "Slavery in the Hemp
Industry"](http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/hemp/history/slavery.htm),
Drug Library

[151]

[152] Earlywine, 2005: [p.
24](https://books.google.com/books?id=r9wPbxMAG8cC&pg=PA24)

[153] Peet, 2004: [p.
55](https://books.google.com/?id=uC0_YznYjScC&pg=PA55)

[154]

[155]

[156]

[157]

[158]

[159]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

[164]

[165]

[166]

[167]

[168]

[169]

[170]

[171]

[172]

[173]

[174]

[175]

[176]

[177] Letter to Daddy Burt from USDA War Board {{!}} Burton Family
Archive: Sallyann Burton Gullett

[178] Picture of Daddy Burt with harvested hemp {{!}} Burton Family
Archive: Jimmy Wallace Bruner

[179]

[180]

[181]

[182]

[183]

[184]

[185]

[186]