![](Handkerchief.jpg "fig:Handkerchief.jpg") with [drawn thread
work](drawn_thread_work "wikilink") around the edges\]\]
![](Linen_cloth.jpg "fig:Linen_cloth.jpg") Cave 1 near the [Dead
Sea](Dead_Sea "wikilink")\]\]
![](Textielmuseum-cabinet-02.jpg "fig:Textielmuseum-cabinet-02.jpg")
**Linen** is a [textile](textile "wikilink") made from the
[fibers](fiber "wikilink") of the [flax](flax "wikilink") plant. Linen
is laborious to manufacture, but the fiber is very strong, absorbent and
dries faster than [cotton](cotton "wikilink"). Garments made of linen
are valued for their exceptional coolness and freshness in hot and humid
weather.

The word *linen* is of [West
Germanic](West_Germanic_languages "wikilink") origin and
[cognate](cognate "wikilink") to the [Latin](Latin "wikilink") name for
the flax plant, *linum*, and the earlier
[Greek](Greek_language "wikilink") λινόν (*linón*). This word history
has given rise to a number of other terms in English, most notably
*[line](line_(geometry) "wikilink"),* from the use of a linen (flax)
[thread](yarn "wikilink") to determine a straight line.[1] Many products
can be made with linen: aprons, bags, towels (swimming, bath, beach,
body and wash towels), napkins, bed linens, tablecloths, runners, chair
covers, and men's and women's wear.

The collective term "[linens](linens "wikilink")" is still often used
generically to describe a class of [woven](weaving "wikilink") or
[knitted](knitting "wikilink") bed, bath, table and kitchen textiles
traditionally made of flax-based linen but today made from a variety of
fibers. The term "linens" refers to lightweight
[undergarments](undergarment "wikilink") such as shirts,
[chemises](chemise "wikilink"), waist-shirts,
[lingerie](lingerie "wikilink") (a cognate with *linen*), and detachable
shirt collars and cuffs, all of which were historically made almost
exclusively out of linen. The inner layer of fine composite cloth
garments (as for example dress jackets) was traditionally made of linen,
hence the word *lining*.[2]

Textiles in a [linen weave](linen_weave "wikilink") texture, even when
made of [cotton](cotton "wikilink"), [hemp](hemp "wikilink"), or other
non-flax fibers, are also loosely referred to as "linen". Such fabrics
frequently have their own specific names: for example fine cotton yarn
in a linen-style weave may be called [madapolam](madapolam "wikilink").

Linen textiles appear to be some of the oldest in the world: their
history goes back many thousands of years. Fragments of straw, seeds,
fibers, yarns, and various types of fabrics dating to about 8000 BC have
been found in Swiss lake dwellings. Dyed flax fibers found in a
prehistoric cave in [Georgia](Georgia_(country) "wikilink") suggest the
use of woven linen fabrics from wild flax may date back even earlier to
36,000 [BP](Before_Present "wikilink").[3][4]

Linen was sometimes used as a form of currency in [ancient
Egypt](ancient_Egypt "wikilink"). Egyptian [mummies](Mummy "wikilink")
were wrapped in linen as a symbol of light and purity, and as a display
of wealth. Some of these fabrics, woven from hand-spun yarns, were very
fine for their day, but are coarse compared to modern linen.[5] In 1923,
the German city [Bielefeld](Bielefeld "wikilink") issued
[banknotes](banknote "wikilink") printed on linen.[6] Today, linen is
usually an expensive textile produced in relatively small quantities. It
has a long [staple](Staple_(textiles) "wikilink") (individual fiber
length) relative to cotton and other [natural
fibers](natural_fiber "wikilink").[7]

## Etymology

The word "linen" is derived from the [Latin](Latin "wikilink") word for
the [flax](flax "wikilink") plant, which is *linum*, and the earlier
[Greek](Greek_language "wikilink") *λίνον* (*linon*). This word history
has given rise to a number of other terms:

-   [Line](Line_(geometry) "wikilink"), derived from the use of a linen
    [thread](yarn "wikilink") to determine a straight line
-   [Lining](Lining_(sewing) "wikilink"), because linen was often used
    to create an inner layer for [wool](wool "wikilink") and
    [leather](leather "wikilink") clothing
-   [Lingerie](Lingerie "wikilink"), via French, originally denotes
    underwear made of linen
-   [Linseed oil](Linseed_oil "wikilink"), an oil derived from
    [flax](flax "wikilink") seed
-   [Linoleum](Linoleum "wikilink"), a floor covering made from linseed
    oil and other materials

## History

![](A_bag_of_white_linen,_unopened._Contains_rolls_of_linen_only._Foundation_deposit,_Heb_Sed_Chapel_at_Lahun,_Fayum,_Egypt._12th_Dynasty._The_Petrie_Museum_of_Egyptian_Archaeology,_London.jpg "fig:A_bag_of_white_linen,_unopened._Contains_rolls_of_linen_only._Foundation_deposit,_Heb_Sed_Chapel_at_Lahun,_Fayum,_Egypt._12th_Dynasty._The_Petrie_Museum_of_Egyptian_Archaeology,_London.jpg")
The discovery of dyed flax fibers in a cave in
[Georgia](Georgia_(country) "wikilink") dated to thirty-six thousand
years ago suggests that ancient people used wild flax fibers to create
linen-like fabrics from an early date.[8][9]

In ancient [Mesopotamia](Mesopotamia "wikilink"),
[flax](flax "wikilink") was domesticated and linen was first produced.
It was used mainly by the wealthier class of the society, including
priests. The Sumerian poem of the courtship of
[Inanna](Inanna "wikilink") and Dumuzi
([Tammuz](Tammuz_(deity) "wikilink")), translated by [Samuel Noah
Kramer](Samuel_Noah_Kramer "wikilink") and [Diane
Wolkstein](Diane_Wolkstein "wikilink") and published in 1983, mentions
flax and linen. It opens with briefly listing the steps of preparing
linen from flax, in a form of questions and answers between
[Inanna](Inanna "wikilink") and her brother [Utu](Utu "wikilink").

In ancient Egypt, linen was used for mummification and for burial
shrouds. It was also worn as clothing on a daily basis; white linen was
worn because of the extreme heat. The use of linen for priestly
vestments was not confined to the Israelites;
[Plutarch](Plutarch "wikilink") wrote that the priests of
[Isis](Isis "wikilink") also wore linen because of its purity.

Linen fabric has been used for table coverings, bed coverings and
clothing for centuries. The significant cost of linen derives not only
from the difficulty of working with the thread, but also because the
flax plant itself requires a great deal of attention. In addition flax
thread is not elastic, and therefore it is difficult to weave without
breaking threads. Thus linen is considerably more expensive to
manufacture than cotton.

There is a long history of the production of linen in Ireland. The
[Living Linen](Living_Linen "wikilink") Project was set up in 1995 as an
oral archive of the knowledge of the [Irish
linen](Irish_linen "wikilink") industry, which was at that time still
available within a nucleus of people who formerly worked in the industry
in [Ulster](Ulster "wikilink").

In December 2006, the General Assembly of the United Nations proclaimed
2009 to be the [International Year of Natural
Fibres](International_Year_of_Natural_Fibres "wikilink") in order to
raise people's awareness of linen and other [natural
fibers](natural_fiber "wikilink").

### Antiquity

When the tomb of the Pharaoh [Ramses II](Ramses_II "wikilink"), who died
in 1213 BC, was discovered in 1881, the linen wrappings were in a state
of perfect preservation after more than 3000 years. When the tomb of
[Tutankhamen](Tutankhamun "wikilink") was opened, the linen curtains
were found to be intact.

In the [Ulster Museum](Ulster_Museum "wikilink"),
[Belfast](Belfast "wikilink") there is the mummy of
'[Takabuti](Takabuti "wikilink")' the daughter of a priest of
[Amun](Amun "wikilink"), who died 2,500 years ago.[10] The linen on this
mummy is also in a perfect state of preservation.

### Earliest linen industry

![](Prices_edict_grades.jpg "fig:Prices_edict_grades.jpg")'s 4th century
maximum prices edict showing prices for 3 grades of linen across the
[Roman Empire](Roman_Empire "wikilink")\]\]

The earliest records of an established linen industry are 4,000 years
old, from Egypt, The earliest written documentation of a linen industry
comes from the [Linear B](Linear_B "wikilink") tablets of
[Pylos](Pylos "wikilink"), [Greece](Greece "wikilink"), where linen is
depicted as an [ideogram](ideogram "wikilink") and also written as
"li-no" ([Greek](Greek_language "wikilink"): λίνον, *linon*), and the
female linen workers are cataloged as "li-ne-ya" (λίνεια,
*lineia*).[11][12]

The [Phoenicians](Phoenicia "wikilink"), who, with their merchant fleet,
opened up new channels of commerce to the peoples of the Mediterranean,
and developed the tin mines of [Cornwall](Cornwall "wikilink"),
introduced flax growing and the making of linen into
[Ireland](Ireland "wikilink") before the [common
era](common_era "wikilink"). It is not until the twelfth century that we
can find records of a definite attempt to systematize flax production.

When the [Edict of Nantes](Edict_of_Nantes "wikilink") was revoked, in
1685, many of the [Huguenots](Huguenots "wikilink") who fled France
settled in the British Isles, and amongst them was [Louis
Crommelin](Louis_Crommelin "wikilink"), who settled in the town of
[Lisburn](Lisburn "wikilink"), about ten miles from
[Belfast](Belfast "wikilink"). Belfast itself is perhaps the most famous
linen producing center throughout history; during the Victorian era the
majority of the world's linen was produced in the city which gained it
the name [Linenopolis](Linenopolis "wikilink").

Although the linen industry was already established in Ulster, Louis
Crommelin found scope for improvement in weaving, and his efforts were
so successful that he was appointed by the Government to develop the
industry over a much wider range than the small confines of Lisburn and
its surroundings. The direct result of his good work was the
establishment, under statute, of the Board of Trustees of the Linen
Manufacturers of Ireland in the year 1711. Several grades were produced
from the coarsest [lockram](lockram "wikilink") to the finest
[sasheen](sasheen "wikilink").

### Religion

In [Judaism](Judaism "wikilink"), the only law concerning which fabrics
may be interwoven together in clothing concerns the mixture of linen and
[wool](wool "wikilink"), called *[shaatnez](shaatnez "wikilink")*; it is
restricted in "Thou shalt not wear a mingled stuff, wool and linen
together" and , "'...neither shall there come upon thee a garment of two
kinds of stuff mingled together.'" There is no explanation for this in
the [Torah](Torah "wikilink") itself and is categorized as a type of law
known as *chukim*, a statute beyond man's ability to comprehend.[13]
Josephus suggested that the reason for the prohibition was to keep the
laity from wearing the official garb of the priests,[14][15] while
[Maimonides](Maimonides "wikilink") thought that the reason was because
heathen priests wore such mixed garments.[16] Others explain that it is
because God often forbids mixtures of disparate kinds, not designed by
God to be compatible in a certain way, with mixing animal and vegetable
fibers being similar to having two different types of plowing animals
yoked together. And that such commands serve both a practical as well as
allegorical purpose, perhaps here preventing a priestly garment that
would cause discomfort (or excessive sweat) in a hot climate.[17]

Linen is also mentioned in the Bible in Proverbs 31, a passage
describing a noble wife. says, "She makes coverings for her bed; she is
clothed in fine linen and purple." Fine white linen is also worn by
angels in the New Testament ().

## Flax fiber

### Description

![](Labeledstemforposter_copy_new.jpg "fig:Labeledstemforposter_copy_new.jpg")
stem cross-section, showing locations of underlying tissues. Ep =
[epidermis](Epidermis_(botany) "wikilink"); C =
[cortex](Cortex_(botany) "wikilink"); BF = bast fibres; P =
[phloem](phloem "wikilink"); X = [xylem](xylem "wikilink"); Pi =
[pith](pith "wikilink")\]\] Linen is a [bast
fiber](bast_fibre "wikilink"). Flax fibers vary in length from about 25
to 150 mm (1 to 6 [in](inch "wikilink")) and average 12–16
[micrometers](micrometre "wikilink") in diameter. There are two
varieties: shorter tow fibers used for coarser fabrics and longer line
fibers used for finer fabrics. Flax fibers can usually be identified by
their “nodes” which add to the flexibility and texture of the fabric.

The cross-section of the linen fiber is made up of irregular
[polygonal](polygon "wikilink") shapes which contribute to the coarse
texture of the fabric.[18]

### Properties

Linen fabric feels cool to touch, a phenomenon which indicates its
higher conductivity (the same principle that makes metals feel "cold").
It is smooth, making the finished fabric lint-free, and gets softer the
more it is washed. However, constant creasing in the same place in sharp
folds will tend to break the linen threads. This wear can show up in
collars, hems, and any area that is iron creased during laundering.
Linen's poor elasticity means that it easily wrinkles.

Mildew, perspiration, and bleach can damage the fabric, but because it
is not made from animal fibers ([keratin](keratin "wikilink")) it is
impervious to [clothes moths](clothes_moth "wikilink") and [carpet
beetles](Varied_carpet_beetle "wikilink"). Linen is relatively easy to
take care of, since it resists dirt and stains, has no lint or
[pilling](Pill_(textile) "wikilink") tendency, and can be dry-cleaned,
machine-washed, or steamed. It can withstand high temperatures, and has
only moderate initial [shrinkage](Shrinkage_(fabric) "wikilink").[19]

Linen should not be dried too much by tumble drying, and it is much
easier to iron when damp. Linen wrinkles very easily, and thus some more
formal garments require ironing often, in order to maintain perfect
smoothness. Nevertheless, the tendency to wrinkle is often considered
part of linen's particular "charm", and many modern linen garments are
designed to be air-dried on a good clothes hanger and worn without the
necessity of ironing.

A characteristic often associated with linen yarn is the presence of
*slubs*, or small, soft, irregular lumps, which occur randomly along its
length. In the past, slubs were traditionally considered to be defects,
and were associated with low quality linen. However, in the case of many
present-day linen fabrics, particularly in the decorative furnishing
industry, slubs are considered as part of the aesthetic appeal of an
expensive natural product. In addition, slubs do not compromise the
integrity of the fabric, and therefore they are not viewed as a defect.
However, the very finest linen has very consistent diameter threads,
with no slubs at all.

### Measure

The standard measure of bulk linen yarn is the "lea", which is the
number of yards in a pound of linen divided by 300. For example, a yarn
having a size of 1 lea will give 300 yards per pound. The fine yarns
used in handkerchiefs, etc. might be 40 lea, and give 40x300 =
12,000 yards per pound. This is a specific length therefore an indirect
measurement of the fineness of the linen, i.e., the number of length
units per unit mass. The symbol is NeL.**(3)** The metric unit, Nm, is
more commonly used in continental Europe. This is the number of 1,000 m
lengths per kilogram. In China, the English Cotton system unit, NeC, is
common. This is the number of 840 yard lengths in a pound.

### Production method

![](Linum_usitatissimum_-_Köhler–s_Medizinal-Pflanzen-088.jpg "fig:Linum_usitatissimum_-_Köhler–s_Medizinal-Pflanzen-088.jpg")
![](LinenMechanicalHarvesting-Summer2009-Belgium.JPG "fig:LinenMechanicalHarvesting-Summer2009-Belgium.JPG")
of flax in [Belgium](Belgium "wikilink"). On the left side, cut flax is
waiting to be baled.\]\]

The quality of the finished linen product is often dependent upon
growing conditions and [harvesting](harvesting "wikilink") techniques.
To generate the longest possible fibers, flax is either hand-harvested
by pulling up the entire plant or stalks are cut very close to the root.
After harvesting, the plants are dried, and the seeds are removed
through a mechanized process called “rippling”
([threshing](threshing "wikilink")) and
[winnowing](winnowing "wikilink").

The fibers must then be loosened from the stalk. This is achieved
through [retting](retting "wikilink"). This is a process which uses
bacteria to decompose the pectin that binds the fibers together. Natural
retting methods take place in tanks and pools, or directly in the
fields. There are also chemical retting methods; these are faster, but
are typically more harmful to the environment and to the fibers
themselves.

After retting, the stalks are ready for
[scutching](scutching "wikilink"), which takes place between August and
December. Scutching removes the woody portion of the stalks by crushing
them between two metal rollers, so that the parts of the stalk can be
separated. The fibers are removed and the other parts such as
[linseed](Linseed#Flax_seeds "wikilink"), [shive](shive "wikilink"), and
[tow](tow_(fibre) "wikilink") are set aside for other uses. Next the
fibers are [heckled](heckling_(flax) "wikilink"): the short fibers are
separated with [heckling combs](heckling_comb "wikilink") by 'combing'
them away, to leave behind only the long, soft flax fibers.

After the fibers have been separated and processed, they are typically
spun into yarns and woven or knit into linen textiles. These textiles
can then be bleached, dyed, printed on, or finished with a number of
treatments or coatings.[20]

An alternate production method is known as “cottonizing” which is
quicker and requires less equipment. The flax stalks are processed using
traditional cotton machinery; however, the finished fibers often lose
the characteristic linen look.

### Producers

Flax is grown in many parts of the world, but top quality flax is
primarily grown in Western European countries and Ukraine. In recent
years bulk linen production has moved to Eastern Europe and China, but
high quality fabrics are still confined to niche producers in Ireland,
Italy and Belgium, and also in countries including Poland, Austria,
France, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, Belarus, Lithuania, Latvia, the
Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, Britain and [Kochi](Kochi "wikilink")
in India. High quality linen fabrics are now produced in the United
States for the upholstery market and in Belgium. Russia is currently the
major flax cultivating nation.

### Uses

![](Bielefeld_Germany_Linen_Notgeld_8_November_1923.jpg "fig:Bielefeld_Germany_Linen_Notgeld_8_November_1923.jpg")
issued by Stadt-Sparkasse on 8 November 1923\]\] Over the past 30 years
the end use for linen has changed dramatically. Approximately 70% of
linen production in the 1990s was for apparel textiles, whereas in the
1970s only about 5% was used for fashion fabrics.

Linen uses range across bed and bath fabrics
([tablecloths](tablecloths "wikilink"), bath towels, dish towels, bed
sheets); home and commercial furnishing items (wallpaper/wall coverings,
upholstery, window treatments); apparel items (suits, dresses, skirts,
shirts); and industrial products (luggage, canvases, sewing thread).[21]
It was once the preferred yarn for handsewing the uppers of
[moccasin](moccasin_(footwear) "wikilink")-style shoes
([loafers](loafers "wikilink")), but has been replaced by synthetics.

A linen [handkerchief](handkerchief "wikilink"), pressed and folded to
display the corners, was a standard decoration of a well-dressed man's
[suit](Suit_(clothing) "wikilink") during most of the first part of the
20th century.

Currently researchers are working on a cotton/flax blend to create new
yarns which will improve the feel of denim during hot and humid
weather.[22]

Linen fabric is one of the preferred traditional supports for [oil
painting](oil_painting "wikilink"). In the United States cotton is
popularly used instead, as linen is many times more expensive there,
restricting its use to professional painters. In Europe, however, linen
is usually the only fabric support available in art shops; in the UK
both are freely available with cotton being cheaper. Linen is preferred
to cotton for its strength, durability and
[archival](archival "wikilink") integrity.

Linen is also used extensively by artisan bakers. Known as a couche, the
flax cloth is used to hold the dough into shape while in the final rise,
just before baking. The couche is heavily dusted with flour which is
rubbed into the pores of the fabric. Then the shaped dough is placed on
the couche. The floured couche makes a "non stick" surface to hold the
dough. Then ridges are formed in the couche to keep the dough from
spreading.

In the past, linen was also used for books (the only surviving example
of which is the [Liber Linteus](Liber_Linteus "wikilink")). Due to its
strength, in the [Middle Ages](Middle_Ages "wikilink") linen was used
for [shields](shield "wikilink"), [gambesons](gambeson "wikilink"), and
[bowstrings](bowstring "wikilink"); in [classical
antiquity](classical_antiquity "wikilink") it was used to make a type of
body armour, referred to as a [linothorax](linothorax "wikilink").

Because of its strength when wet, [Irish linen](Irish_linen "wikilink")
is a very popular wrap of pool/billiard cues, due to its absorption of
sweat from hands. Paper made of linen can be very strong and crisp,
which is why the United States and many other countries print their
currency on paper made from 25% linen and 75% cotton.

## See also

-   [Dowlas](Dowlas "wikilink"), a strong linen mentioned by Shakespeare
-   [Ramie](Ramie "wikilink"), another type of bast fiber with similar
    properties

## References

## External links

-   [Linen Fiber and Linen Fabrics from the Flax
    Plants](https://www.textileschool.com/2632/linen-fiber-from-flax-plants-and-the-linen-fabrics/)

[01](Category:Linen_industry "wikilink")
[Category:Flax](Category:Flax "wikilink") [Category:Woven
fabrics](Category:Woven_fabrics "wikilink")
[Category:Linens](Category:Linens "wikilink")

[1]

[2] lining. Dictionary.com. Online Etymology Dictionary. Douglas Harper,
Historian. (accessed: October 3, 2014).

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7] *Textiles*, Ninth Edition by Sara J. Kadolph and Anna L. Langford.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall

[8]

[9]

[10] ["Takabuti the ancient Egyptian
mummy"](https://www.nmni.com/our-museums/ulster-museum/Things-to-see/Takabuti-the-ancient-Egyptian-mummy.aspx)
- Ulster Museum, Egyptian Gallery

[11] [Flax and Linen Textiles in the Mycenaean palatial
economy](http://www3.lu.se/klass/textiles/throughsociety.html#rouge)

[12]

[13] The Jewish Primer, by Shmuel Himelstein. New York, NY: Facts On
File, 1990.

[14] Etz Hayim p. 1118

[15]

[16] Guide for the Perplexed 3:37

[17] Jamieson, Fausset, Brown commentary, Lv. 19:19

[18] Classifications & Analysis of Textiles: A Handbook by Karen L.
LaBat, Ph.D. and Carol J. Salusso, Ph.A. University of Minnesota, 2003

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]