![](Microfiber_or_Microfibre.JPG "fig:Microfiber_or_Microfibre.JPG")
![](Microfibre_householdcloth.jpg "fig:Microfibre_householdcloth.jpg")

**Microfiber** (or **microfibre**) is synthetic fiber finer than one
[denier](Denier_(unit) "wikilink") or
[decitex](decitex "wikilink")/thread, having a
[diameter](diameter "wikilink") of less than ten
[micrometres](micrometre "wikilink"). This is smaller than the diameter
of a strand of silk (which is approximately one denier), which is itself
about 1/5 the diameter of a human hair.

The most common types of microfibers are made from polyesters,
polyamides (e.g., nylon, Kevlar, Nomex, trogamide), or a conjugation of
polyester, polyamide, and polypropylene. Microfiber is used to make
mats, knits, and weaves for apparel, upholstery, industrial filters, and
cleaning products. The shape, size, and combinations of synthetic fibers
are selected for specific characteristics, including softness,
toughness, absorption, water repellency, electrostatics, and filtering
capabilities.

## History

Production of ultra-fine fibers (finer than 0.7
[denier](Denier_(unit) "wikilink")) dates back to the late 1950s, using
melt-blown [spinning](spinning_(textiles) "wikilink") and flash spinning
techniques. However, only fine staples of random length could be
manufactured and very few applications could be found.[1] Experiments to
produce ultra-fine fibers of a continuous filament type were made
subsequently, the most promising of which were run in Japan during the
1960s by Dr. Miyoshi Okamoto, a scientist at Toray Industries.[2]
Okamoto's discoveries, together with those of Dr. Toyohiko Hikota,
resulted in many industrial applications. Among these was
[Ultrasuede](Ultrasuede "wikilink"), one of the first successful
synthetic microfibers, which found its way onto the market in the 1970s.
Microfiber's use in the textile industry then expanded. Microfibers were
first publicized in the early 1990s in [Sweden](Sweden "wikilink") and
saw success as a product in [Europe](Europe "wikilink") over the course
of the decade.

## Apparel

### Clothing

Microfiber fabric is frequently used for athletic wear, such as
[cycling](cycling "wikilink") [jerseys](jersey_(clothing) "wikilink"),
because the microfiber material [wicks](Capillary_action "wikilink")
moisture ([perspiration](perspiration "wikilink")) away from the body,
keeping the wearer cool and dry. Microfiber is also very elastic, making
it suitable for undergarments.

Microfiber can be used to make tough, very soft-to-the-touch materials
for general clothing use, often used in skirts and jackets. Microfiber
fabric can also be used for making bathrobes, jackets, swim trunks, and
other clothing that can be worn for aquatic activities such as swimming.
Microfiber can be made into [Ultrasuede](Ultrasuede "wikilink"), an
animal-free imitation suede leather-like product that is cheaper and
easier to clean and sew than natural suede leather.

### Accessories

Microfiber is used to make many accessories that traditionally have been
made from [leather](leather "wikilink"): wallets, handbags, backpacks,
book covers, shoes, cell phone cases, and coin purses. Microfiber fabric
is lightweight, durable, and somewhat water repellent, so it makes a
good substitute.[3]

Another advantage of Microfiber fabric (compared to leather) is that it
can be coated with various finishes or can be treated with
[antibacterial](antibacterial "wikilink") chemicals. Fabric can also be
printed with various designs, embroidered with colored thread, or
heat-embossed to create interesting textures.

## Other uses

### Textiles for cleaning

![](Microfiber-vs-Cotton.png "fig:Microfiber-vs-Cotton.png")
![](Microfiber_shammy_2.jpg "fig:Microfiber_shammy_2.jpg")
![](Mop_for_wet_use,_looped_microfiber,_velcro_back,_60_cm.jpg "fig:Mop_for_wet_use,_looped_microfiber,_velcro_back,_60_cm.jpg")
In [cleaning products](cleaning_product "wikilink"), microfiber can be
100% polyester, or a blend of polyester and polyamide (nylon). It can be
either a woven product or a non woven product, the latter most often
used in limited use or disposable cloths. In the highest-quality fabrics
for cleaning applications, the fiber is split during the manufacturing
process to produce multi-stranded fibers. A cross section of the split
microfiber fabric under high magnification would look like an asterisk.

The split fibers and the size of the individual filaments make the
cloths more effective than other fabrics for cleaning purposes. The
structure traps and retains the dirt and also absorbs liquids. Unlike
cotton, microfiber leaves no [lint](lint_(material) "wikilink"), the
exception being some micro suede blends, where the surface is
mechanically processed to produce a soft plush feel.[4]

For microfiber to be most effective as a cleaning product, especially
for water-soluble soils and waxes, it should be a split microfiber.
Non-split microfiber is little more than a very soft cloth. The main
exception is for cloths used for facial cleansing and for the removal of
skin oils (sebum), sunscreens, and mosquito repellents from optical
surfaces such as cameras, phones and eyeglasses wherein higher-end
proprietary woven, 100% polyester cloths using 2 [µm](µm "wikilink")
filaments, will absorb these types of oils without smearing.

Microfiber that is used in non-sports-related clothing, furniture, and
other applications isn't split because it isn't designed to be
absorbent, just soft. When buying, microfiber may not be labelled to
designate whether it is split. One way to determine what microfiber it
is, is to run the cloth over the palm of the hand. A split microfiber
will cling to imperfections of the skin and can be either heard or felt.
Another way is to pour a small amount of water on a hard flat surface
and try to push the water with the microfiber. If the water is pushed
rather than being absorbed, it's not split microfiber.

Microfiber can be electrostatically charged for special purposes like
filtration.[5]

### Cloths and mops

Microfiber products used for consumer cleaning are generally constructed
from split conjugated fibers of [polyester](polyester "wikilink") and
[polyamide](polyamide "wikilink"). Microfiber used for commercial
cleaning products also includes many products constructed of 100%
polyester. Microfiber products have exceptional ability to absorb
[oils](oil "wikilink"), and are not hard enough to scratch even
[paintwork](paintwork "wikilink") unless they have retained grit or hard
particles from previous use. Due to [hydrogen
bonding](hydrogen_bonding "wikilink"), microfibre cloth containing
polyamide absorbs and holds more water than other types of fibres.

Microfiber is widely used by [car detailers](auto_detailing "wikilink")
to handle tasks such as removing wax from paintwork, quick detailing,
cleaning interior, cleaning glass, and drying. Because of their fine
fibers which leave no [lint](lint_(material) "wikilink") or
[dust](dust "wikilink"), microfiber towels are used by car detailers and
enthusiasts in a similar manner to a [chamois
leather](chamois_leather "wikilink").

Microfiber is used in many professional cleaning applications, for
example in [mops](mop "wikilink") and cleaning cloths. Although
microfiber mops cost more than non-microfiber mops, they may be more
economical because they last longer and require less effort to
use.[6][7]

Microfiber textiles designed for cleaning clean on a microscopic scale.
According to tests using microfiber materials to clean a surface leads
to reducing the number of bacteria by 99%, whereas a conventional
cleaning material reduces this number only by 33%.[8] Microfiber
cleaning tools also absorb fat and grease and their
[electrostatic](electrostatic "wikilink") properties give them a high
dust-attracting power.

Microfiber cloths are used to clean photographic lenses as they absorb
oily matter without being abrasive or leaving a residue, and are sold by
major manufacturers such as [Sinar](Sinar "wikilink"),
[Nikon](Nikon "wikilink") and [Canon](Canon_(company) "wikilink"). Small
microfiber cleaning cloths are commonly sold for cleaning computer
screens and [eyeglasses](eyeglasses "wikilink").

Microfiber is unsuitable for some cleaning applications as it
accumulates dust, debris, and particles. Sensitive surfaces (such as all
high-tech coated surfaces e.g. [CRT](cathode_ray_tube "wikilink"),
[LCD](liquid_crystal_display "wikilink") and
[plasma](plasma_display "wikilink") screens) can easily be damaged by a
microfiber cloth if it has picked up grit or other abrasive particles
during use. One way to minimize the risk of damage to flat surfaces is
to use a flat, non-rugged microfiber cloth, as these tend to be less
prone to retaining grit.

Rags made of microfiber must only be washed with regular [laundry
detergent](laundry_detergent "wikilink"), not oily, self-softening,
soap-based [detergents](detergent "wikilink"). [Fabric
softener](Fabric_softener "wikilink") must not be used. The oils and
[cationic surfactants](cationic_surfactant "wikilink") in the softener
and self-softening detergents will clog up the fibers and make them less
absorbent until the oils are washed out. Also, since microfibre cloth
attracts much soil and holds water tightly, it provides an ideal
nutritional environment for various microorganisms.

### Insulation

Microfiber materials such as [PrimaLoft](PrimaLoft "wikilink") are used
for thermal insulation as a replacement for [down
feather](down_feather "wikilink") insulation in sleeping bags and
outdoor equipment, because of their better retention of heat when damp
or wet.[9] Microfiber is also used for water insulation in automotive
car covers. Depending on the technology the fiber manufacturer is using,
such material may contain from 2 up to 5 thin layers, merged. Such
combination ensures not only high absorption factor, but also
breathability of the material, which prevents [greenhouse
effect](greenhouse_effect "wikilink").

### Basketballs

With microfiber-shelled [basketballs](Basketball_(ball) "wikilink")
already used by [FIBA](FIBA "wikilink"), the
[NBA](National_Basketball_Association "wikilink") introduced a
microfiber ball for the 2006–07 season.[10] The ball, which is
manufactured by [Spalding](Spalding_(sports_equipment) "wikilink"), does
not require a "break-in" period of use as [leather](leather "wikilink")
balls do and has the ability to absorb water and oils, meaning that
sweat from players touching the ball is better absorbed, making the ball
less slippery.[11] Over the course of the season, the league received
many complaints from players who found that the ball bounced differently
from leather balls, and that it left cuts on their hands.[12] On January
1, 2007, the league scrapped the use of all microfiber balls and
returned to leather basketballs.[13]

### Other

Microfibers used in tablecloths, furniture, and car interiors are
designed to [repel wetting](hydrophobic "wikilink") and consequently are
difficult to stain. Microfiber tablecloths will bead liquids until they
are removed and are sometimes advertised showing red wine on a white
tablecloth that wipes clean with a paper towel. This and the ability to
mimic suede economically are common selling points for microfiber
upholstery fabrics (e.g., for [couches](couch "wikilink")).

Microfibers are used in towels especially those to be used at swimming
pools as even a small towel dries the body quickly. They dry quickly and
are less prone than cotton towels to become stale if not dried
immediately. Microfiber towels need to be soaked in water and pressed
before use, as they would otherwise repel water as microfiber
tablecloths do.

Microfiber is also used for other applications such as making menstrual
pads, cloth diaper inserts, body scrubbers, face mitts, whiteboard
cleaners, and various goods that need to absorb water and/or attract
small particle.

## Environmental and safety issues

Microfiber textiles tend to be [flammable](flammability "wikilink") if
manufactured from hydrocarbons ([polyester](polyester "wikilink")) or
carbohydrates ([cellulose](cellulose "wikilink")) and emit
[toxic](toxic "wikilink") gases when burning, more so if aromatic (PET,
PS, ABS) or treated with [halogenated](halogenated "wikilink") [flame
retardants](flame_retardant "wikilink") and [azo
dyes](azo_dye "wikilink").[14] Their polyester and
[nylon](nylon "wikilink") stock are made from
[petrochemicals](petrochemical "wikilink"), which are not a [renewable
resource](renewable_resource "wikilink") and are not
[biodegradable](biodegradation "wikilink"). However, if made out of
[polypropylene](polypropylene "wikilink"), they are recyclable (Prolen).

For most cleaning applications they are designed for repeated use rather
than being discarded after use.[15] An exception to this is the precise
cleaning of optical components where a wet cloth is drawn once across
the object and must not be used again as the debris collected are now
embedded in the cloth and may scratch the optical surface.

Microfiber that is made from [petrochemicals](petrochemical "wikilink")
includes [polyester](polyester "wikilink") and [nylon](nylon "wikilink")
which are not [biodegradable](Biodegradation "wikilink"). However,
microfiber made from [polypropylene](polypropylene "wikilink") can be
recyclable. Microfiber products may also have the potential of entering
the oceanic water supply and [food chain](food_chain "wikilink") similar
to other [microplastics](microplastics "wikilink").[16] Synthetic
clothing made of microfibers that are washed can release materials and
travel to local [wastewater treatment](wastewater_treatment "wikilink")
plants, contributing to [plastic
pollution](plastic_pollution "wikilink") in water. Fibers retained in
wastewater treatment sludge (biosolids) that are land-applied can
persist in soils.[17]

There are environmental concerns about this product entering the oceanic
[food chain](food_chain "wikilink") similar to other
[microplastics](microplastics "wikilink").[18] A study by the clothing
brand Patagonia and University of California, Santa Barbara, found that
when synthetic jackets made of microfibers are washed, on average of
microfibers are released from the [washing
machine](washing_machine "wikilink"). These microfibers then travel to
local [wastewater treatment](wastewater_treatment "wikilink") plants,
where up to 40% of them enter into rivers, lakes, and
[oceans](ocean "wikilink") where they contribute to the overall [plastic
pollution](plastic_pollution "wikilink").[19][20] Microfibers account
for 85% of man-made debris found on shorelines worldwide.[21][22]

However, no [pesticides](pesticides "wikilink") are used for producing
synthetic fibers (in comparison to [cotton](cotton "wikilink")). If
these products are made of polypropylene yarn, the yarn is dope-dyed;
i.e. no water is used for dyeing (as with cotton, where thousands of
liters of water become
[contaminated](water_contamination "wikilink")).[23][24]

## See also

-   [Polyamide](Polyamide "wikilink")
-   [Polyester](Polyester "wikilink")
-   [Polar fleece](Polar_fleece "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Synthetic fibers](Category:Synthetic_fibers "wikilink")
[Category:Textiles](Category:Textiles "wikilink") [Category:Technical
fabrics](Category:Technical_fabrics "wikilink") [Category:Sustainable
products](Category:Sustainable_products "wikilink")

[1] Nakajima T, Kajiwara K, McIntyre J E, 1994. [*Advanced Fiber
Spinning
Technology*](https://books.google.com/books?id=sxUsqJQUKY0C&pg=PA187&source=gbs_toc_r&cad=0_0).
Woodhead Publishing, pp. 187–188

[2] Kanigel, Robert, 2007. [*Faux Real: Genuine Leather and 200 Years of
Inspired
Fakes*](https://books.google.com/books?id=KMYOFrr41fUC&printsec=frontcover&client=firefox-a&source=gbs_summary_r&cad=0#PPA184,M1).
Joseph Henry Press, pp. 186–192

[3]

[4]

[5] "SYNTHETIC SPLIT MICROFIBER TECHNOLOGY FOR FILTRATION " by Jeff
Dugan, Vice President Research and Development Fiber Innovation
Technologies and Ed Homonoff President Edward C. Homonoff & Associates,
LLC

[6] UC Davis Health System: Newroom. [*UC Davis Pioneers Use of
Microfiber Mops in Hospitals: Mops reduce injuries, kill more germs and
reduce
costs.*](http://www.ucdmc.ucdavis.edu/newsroom/releases/archives/other/2006/mop6-2006.html)
June 23, 2006.

[7] Sustainable Hospitals Project, [University of Massachusetts
Lowell](University_of_Massachusetts_Lowell "wikilink"). [*10 Reasons to
Use Microfiber
Mopping.*](http://www.sustainablehospitals.org/PDF/tenreasonsmop.pdf)

[8] [UC Davis Health System: Newroom  UC Davis Pioneers Use Of
Microfiber Mops In
Hospitals](https://web.archive.org/web/20100706120121/http://www.ucdmc.ucdavis.edu/newsroom/releases/archives/other/2006/mop6-2006.html).
Ucdmc.ucdavis.edu. Retrieved on 2010-12-01.

[9]

[10] [NBA Introduces New Game
Ball](http://www.nba.com/news/blackbox_060628.html). NBA.com, June 28,
2006.

[11]

[12] Josh Hart, [NBA to Take Microfiber Basketball and Go
Home](http://www.nationalledger.com/cgi-bin/artman/exec/view.cgi?archive=7&num=10405).
*[National Ledger](National_Ledger "wikilink")*, December 12, 2006.

[13]

[14] Emil Braun and Barbara C. Levin, "[Polyesters: A Review of the
Literature on Products of Combustion and
Toxicity](http://fire.nist.gov/bfrlpubs/fire86/PDF/f86012.pdf)", *Fire
and Materials* 10:107–123 (1986)

[15] Barbara Flanagan, [The Case of the Missing
Microfiber](https://web.archive.org/web/20080520014821/http://www.id-mag.com/article/Missing-Microfiber/).
*I.D.*, April 22, 2008.

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23] <http://www.waterfootprint.org/Reports/Report18.pdf>

[24]