A **polyolefin** is a type of [polymer](polymer "wikilink") produced
from a simple [olefin](olefin "wikilink") (also called an
[alkene](alkene "wikilink") with the general formula
C<sub>n</sub>H<sub>2n</sub>) as a [monomer](monomer "wikilink"). For
example, [polyethylene](polyethylene "wikilink") is the polyolefin
produced by polymerizing the olefin [ethylene](ethylene "wikilink").
[Polypropylene](Polypropylene "wikilink") is another common polyolefin
which is made from the olefin [propylene](propylene "wikilink").

## Industrial polyolefins

Most polyolefin produced on an industrial scale are made via
polymerization through the use of catalysts. One example is the use of
Ziegler-Natta catalyst for the polymerization of ethylene to
polyethylene.[1]

-   [Thermoplastic](Thermoplastic "wikilink") polyolefins:
    [polyethylene](polyethylene "wikilink") (PE),
    [polypropylene](polypropylene "wikilink") (PP),
    [polymethylpentene](polymethylpentene "wikilink") (PMP),
    [polybutene-1](polybutene-1 "wikilink") (PB-1);
-   Polyolefin [elastomers](elastomer "wikilink") (POE):
    [polyisobutylene](polyisobutylene "wikilink") (PIB), [ethylene
    propylene rubber](ethylene_propylene_rubber "wikilink") (EPR),
    [ethylene propylene diene monomer (M-class)
    rubber](EPDM_rubber "wikilink") (EPDM rubber)

## Properties

Polyolefin properties range from liquidlike to rigid solids, and are
primarily determined by their molecular weight and degree of
crystallinity. Polyolefin degrees of crystallinity range from 0%
(liquidlike) to 60% or higher (rigid plastics). Crystallinity is
primarily governed by the lengths of polymer's crystallizable sequences
established during [polymerization](polymerization "wikilink").[2]
Examples include adding a small percentage of
[comonomer](comonomer "wikilink") like [1-hexene](1-hexene "wikilink")
or [1-octene](1-octene "wikilink") during the polymerization of
[ethylene](ethylene "wikilink"),[3] or occasional irregular insertions
("stereo" or "regio" defects) during the polymerization of
[isotactic](isotactic "wikilink") [propylene](propylene "wikilink").[4]
The polymer's ability to crystallize to high degrees decreases with
increasing content of defects.

Low degrees of crystallinity (0-20%) are associated with
liquidlike-to-elastomeric properties. Intermediate degrees of
crystallinity (20-50%) are associated with ductile thermoplastics, and
degrees of crystallity over 50% are associated with rigid and sometimes
brittle plastics.[5]

Polyolefin surfaces are not effectively joined together by [solvent
welding](solvent_welding "wikilink") because they have excellent
[chemical resistance](chemical_resistance "wikilink") and are unaffected
by common solvents. They can be adhesively bonded after surface
treatment (they inherently have very low [surface
energies](surface_energy "wikilink") and don't wet-out well (the process
of being covered and filled with [resin](resin "wikilink"))), and by
some superglues ([cyanoacrylates](cyanoacrylate "wikilink")) and
reactive (meth)[acrylate](acrylate "wikilink") glues.[6] They are
extremely [inert](Chemically_inert "wikilink") chemically but exhibit
decreased strength at lower and higher temperatures.[7] As a result of
this, thermal welding is a common bonding technique.

Practically all polyolefins that are of any practical or commercial
importance are **poly-*alpha*-olefin** (or poly-α-olefin or
polyalphaolefin, sometimes abbreviated as **PAO**), a polymer made by
polymerizing an [*alpha*-olefin](Alpha-olefin "wikilink"). An
***alpha*-olefin** (or α-olefin) is an [alkene](alkene "wikilink") where
the carbon-carbon [double bond](double_bond "wikilink") starts at the
α-carbon atom, i.e. the double bond is between the #1 and #2 carbons in
the [molecule](molecule "wikilink"). Alpha-olefins such as
[1-hexene](1-Hexene "wikilink") may be used as co-monomers to give an
[alkyl](alkyl "wikilink") branched [polymer](polymer "wikilink") (see
[chemical structure](chemical_structure "wikilink") below), although
[1-decene](1-decene "wikilink") is most commonly used for lubricant base
stocks.[8] ![](1-Hexene.svg "fig:1-Hexene.svg") Many poly-alpha-olefins
have flexible alkyl branching groups on every other carbon of their
polymer backbone chain. These alkyl groups, which can shape themselves
in numerous [conformations](Chemical_structure "wikilink"), make it very
difficult for the polymer [molecules](molecule "wikilink") to align
themselves up side-by-side in an orderly way. This results in lower
contact [surface area](surface_area "wikilink") between the
[molecules](molecule "wikilink") and decreases the [intermolecular
interactions](Intermolecular_force "wikilink") between molecules.[9]
Therefore, many poly-alpha-olefins do not crystallize or solidify easily
and are able to remain oily, [viscous](viscous "wikilink") liquids even
at lower [temperatures](temperature "wikilink").[10] Low molecular
weight poly-*alpha*-olefins are useful as synthetic
[lubricants](lubricant "wikilink") such as [synthetic motor
oils](synthetic_oil "wikilink") for vehicles and can be used over a wide
temperature range.[11][12]

Even [polyethylenes](polyethylene "wikilink")
[copolymerized](copolymer "wikilink") with a small amount of
alpha-olefins (such as [1-hexene](1-Hexene "wikilink"),
[1-octene](1-octene "wikilink"), or longer) are more flexible than
simple straight-chain high-density polyethylene, which has no
branching.[13] The [methyl](methyl "wikilink") branch groups on a
[polypropylene](polypropylene "wikilink") polymer are not long enough to
make typical commercial polypropylene more flexible than polyethylene.

## Uses

Polyolefins are used for [blow moulded](blow_moulding "wikilink") or
[rotationally moulded](rotational_moulding "wikilink") components, e.g.
toys,[14] for [heat-shrink tubing](heat-shrink_tubing "wikilink") used
to mechanically and electrically protect connections in electronics,[15]
and for rash guards or undergarments for wetsuits.

Polyolefin sheets or foams are used in a wide variety of packaging
applications, sometimes in direct contact with food.[16]

Polyolefin elastomer POE is used as a main ingredient in the molded
[flexible foam](flexible_foam "wikilink") technology such as in the
fabrication of self skinned footwear (for example,
[Crocs](Crocs "wikilink") shoes), seat cushions, arm rests, spa pillows,
etc. Hydrogenated polyalphaolefin (PAO) is used as a [radar
coolant](Radar#Coolant "wikilink"). [Head](Head_(company) "wikilink")
makes polyolefin [tennis racket](tennis_racket "wikilink") strings.
Polyolefin is also used in pharmaceutical and medical industry for [HEPA
filter](HEPA_filter "wikilink") certification—a PAO
[aerosol](aerosol "wikilink") is passed through the filters and the air
that exits is measured with an aerosol detector.[17]

[Elastolefin](Elastolefin "wikilink") is a fiber used in fabrics.[18]
[IKEA](IKEA "wikilink")'s Better Shelter uses structural panels made out
of polyolefin foam, stating, "They are tough and durable.".[19] Piping
systems for the conveyance of water, chemicals or gases are commonly
produced in Polypropylene, and to a much greater extent Polyethylene.
Piping systems in high-density Polyethylene (HDPE, PE100, PE80) are fast
becoming the most commonly used drinking water, waste water and natural
gas distribution piping systems in the world.

Polyalphaolefin, commonly referred to as a synthetic hydrocarbon, is
used in various types of air compressors including reciprocating,
centrifugal, and rotary screw compressors where high pressures and
temperatures can be an issue. These base fluids are the most widely used
variety of synthetic oil blends mainly for their ability to maintain
performance in spite of temperature extremes and their similarity to -
but improved performance over - mineral oil base fluids.[20]

Polyolefin waste can be converted into many different products,
including pure polymers, naphtha, clean fuels, or monomers.[21]

## References

## External links

-   [MSDS (Material Safety Data
    Sheet)](http://www.nicnas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/9617/PLC210FR.pdf)
-   [Polymer
    Structure](http://openlearn.open.ac.uk/mod/resource/view.php?id=196631)

[Category:Plastics](Category:Plastics "wikilink")
[Polyolefins](Category:Polyolefins "wikilink")

[1]

[2] Tashiro, Stein, Hsu, Macromolecules 25 (1992) 1801-1810

[3] Alizadeh et. al., Macromolecules 32 (1999) 6221-6235

[4]

[5] A. J. Kinloch, R. J. Young, The Fracture Behaviour of Polymers,
Chapman & Hall, 1995 pp. 338-369.

[6] "[Properties and Applications of Polyolefin
Bonding](http://www.masterbond.com/applications/properties-and-applications-polyolefin-bonding)"
"[1](http://www.masterbond.com/) Master Bond Inc." Retrieved on June 24,
2013

[7]

[8]

[9] "[Properties of
Alkanes](http://chemed.chem.wisc.edu/chempaths/GenChem-Textbook/Properties-of-Alkanes-917.html)
." Retrieved on June 24, 2013

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]