---
title: Chartreuse
permalink: /Chartreuse/
---

Chartreuse}}

<table>
<caption>Chartreuse as a <a href="/tertiary_color" title="wikilink">tertiary color</a></caption>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Chartreuse as a [tertiary color](/tertiary_color "wikilink")

**Chartreuse** (, ,[1] )[2] is a color between
[yellow](/yellow "wikilink") and [green](/green "wikilink") that was
named because of its resemblance to the green color of one of the French
[liqueurs](/liqueur "wikilink") called *[green
chartreuse](/Chartreuse_(liqueur) "wikilink")*, introduced in 1764.
Similarly, *chartreuse yellow* is a yellow color mixed with a small
amount of green that was named because of its resemblance to the color
of one of the French liqueurs called *[yellow
chartreuse](/Chartreuse_(liqueur)#Types "wikilink")*, introduced in
1838.[3]

## Etymology

The [French](/French_language "wikilink") word *chartreuse* means
"[charterhouse](/wikt:charterhouse "wikilink")". The
[monasteries](/monastery "wikilink") that the monks of the
[Carthusian](/Carthusian "wikilink") order (who started producing
[Chartreuse liqueur](/Chartreuse_liqueur "wikilink") in 1764) live in,
of which the first one was established in 1082 by [Saint
Bruno](/Bruno_of_Cologne "wikilink"), are called charter houses because
they were chartered—and given generous material support—by the [Duke of
Burgundy](/Duke_of_Burgundy "wikilink") known as [Philip the
Bold](/Philip_the_Bold "wikilink") when he took over the area in 1378.
Philip the Bold's elaborately decorated tomb was initially installed at
a Carthusian charterhouse when he died in 1404.[4]

## Chartreuse (web color)

[thumb\|left\|Green [Chartreuse
liqueur](Chartreuse_(liqueur) "wikilink")](/File:Schnapsglas_grüner_Chartreuse.jpg "wikilink")
At right is displayed the web color **chartreuse**.

The term *chartreuse* is defined by the Oxford English Dictionary as: "A
shade of colour; a pale apple-green". The dictionary gives a quotation
in the British publication *[Western Daily
Press](/Western_Daily_Press "wikilink")* (26 Dec. 1884) Vol. 7 No. 5 as
being the earliest occurrence found in print of the term 'chartreuse'
used as the name of a color. However the source does not define or
describe the color referred to.[5]

In *The Domestic Monthly* (1885) is written, "The delicate, pale green,
with a yellow tinge, entitled 'Chartreuse,' is a rival to the renewed
apple green," and, "The new shade of Chartreuse green, from light to
dark, is lovely in the large feather fans. ... Some of the corded silks
have fancy stripes in a combination of colors such as ... mousse and
Chartreuse, which is the stylish yellow green."[6]

In *The Ladies' Home Journal* of May 1889, is written, "Chantilly cloaks
come shaped like the old-fashioned rotonde, with collar of narrow lace,
and are worn over a lining of chartreuse green or jonquil yellow."[7]

In *The Millinery Trade Review* (1889) is written, "From Madame Catlin
of Paris, a hat of velvet in moss-green of medium tone, or of strong
Chartreuse-green."[8]

In *The Mineral Industry* (1898) is written, "The characteristic twin
colors of a few doubly refractive gems will prove of interest ...
tourmaline green (chartreuse green and bluish green).[9]

In *Dry Goods Reporter* (1905), it is noted under "Choosing an Easter
Hat" — "Chartreuse greens are among the colors hardest of all to combine
artistically, and yet with the new popular bluet are charming."[10]

In *Pure Products* (1910) is written, "The following colors can be
bought in powder form ... chartreuse green".[11]

"Chartreuse Green" is also listed in *Plochere Color System* (1948).[12]

In a 1956 edition of [*Billboard*](/Billboard_(magazine) "wikilink"), a
[juke box](/juke_box "wikilink") is advertised as being available in
"Delft blue, cherry red, embered charcoal, chartreuse green, bright
sand, canary yellow, atoll coral and night-sky black."[13]

In *Color: Universal Language and Dictionary of Names* (1976),
"Chartreuse Green" is listed under "116. Brilliant Yellow Green".[14]

Chartreuse green was codified to refer to this brighter color when the
[X11](/X11_color_names "wikilink") colors were formulated in 1987; by
the early 1990s, they became known as the [X11 web
colors](/Web_color "wikilink"). The [web color](/web_color "wikilink")
*chartreuse* is the color precisely halfway between green and yellow, so
it is 50% green and 50% yellow. It is one of the tertiary colors of the
[HSV color wheel](/HSV_color_space "wikilink"), also known as the [RGB
color wheel](/:File:RBG_color_wheel.svg "wikilink"). Another name for
this color is **chartreuse green**.[15]

In 1988, Margaret Walch, director of the [Color Association of the
United States](/Color_Association_of_the_United_States "wikilink") is
reported to have said, "The hottest color out there now is an ugly
chartreuse green.... It suggests what we don't have: nature, youth,
energy, growth."[16]

## Chartreuse yellow

[thumb\|left\|A bottle of [chartreuse
liqueur](Chartreuse_(liqueur) "wikilink")](/File:Chartreuse-bottle.jpg "wikilink")
The first recorded use of *chartreuse* for the color that is now called
*chartreuse yellow* in American English was in 1892.[17]

In the book *Color Standards and Color Nomenclature* (1912), "Chartreuse
Yellow" is listed and illustrated.[18]

## Variations of chartreuse

### Nyanza

The color **nyanza** is displayed at right.

The first recorded use of *nyanza* as a color name in
[English](/English_language "wikilink") was in 1892.[19]

### Mindaro

Displayed at right is the color **mindaro**.

The first use in English of the color name *mindaro* was in 2001, when
it was formulated as one of the colors on the [Xona.com Color
List](http://xona.com/colorlist/).

### Pear

[thumb\|left\|[Pears](Pear "wikilink")\|alt=Pears](/Image:Pears.jpg "wikilink")

**Pear** is a [desaturated](/Saturation_(color_theory) "wikilink")
chartreuse yellow color that resembles the color of the exterior surface
of Anjou or Bartlett [pears](/pear "wikilink").

### Lemon-lime

**Lemon-lime** is a [fluorescent](/Fluorescence "wikilink") chartreuse
color that refers to a theoretical combination of the two colors of the
lemon and lime fruit rinds. Such a name might have been popularized by
the advertising of various carbonated soft drinks such as
[Sprite](/Sprite_(soft_drink) "wikilink"), [7 Up](/7_Up "wikilink") and
[Sierra Mist](/Sierra_Mist "wikilink"), although all three of these
drinks actually appear clear and colorless.

### Lime

[left\|thumb\|[Limes](Lime_(fruit) "wikilink")](/File:Limes.jpg "wikilink")

**Lime** is a [color](/color "wikilink") that is sometimes referred to
as a representation of the color of the citrus fruit called
[limes](/Lime_(fruit) "wikilink"). However, in its original form, it
referred to the colour of the samara fruits of the lime or linden tree
(species in the genus [Tillia](/Tillia "wikilink"); Malvaceae).

The first recorded use of *lime green* as a color name in
[English](/English_language "wikilink") was in 1890.[20][21]

### Green-yellow

Displayed at right is the web color **green-yellow**, a light
[tint](/tint "wikilink") of chartreuse.

### Spring bud

Displayed at right is the color **spring bud**.

This was the color that was traditionally called "spring green" before
the web color *[spring green](/spring_green "wikilink")* was formulated
in 1987.

The first recorded use of *spring green* as a color name in
[English](/English_language "wikilink") (meaning the color that is now
called *spring bud*) was in 1766.[22]

### Lawn green

Displayed at right is the web color **lawn green**, a bright tint of
chartreuse.

### Pistachio

[200 px\|thumb\|left\|Ripening [pistachio](pistachio "wikilink")
[culinary
nuts](/nut_(fruit)#Culinary_definition_and_uses "wikilink")](/File:Pistacia_vera_Kerman.jpg "wikilink")

Displayed at right is the color **pistachio**, also called **pistachio
green**, a representation of the color of the interior meat of a
[pistachio](/pistachio "wikilink") [nut](/Nut_(fruit) "wikilink"). It is
also a representation of the color of [pistachio ice
cream](/pistachio_ice_cream "wikilink"), one of the flavors of ice cream
in [spumoni](/spumoni "wikilink"), and of pistachio
[pudding](/pudding "wikilink").

The first recorded use of *pistachio green* as a color name in English
was in 1789.[23]

### Yellow-green

Displayed at right is the web color **yellow-green**, a dull medium
shade of chartreuse.

Before the X11 colors were formulated in 1987, the color term
*yellow-green* was used to refer to the color that is now designated as
the web color *chartreuse* (*chartreuse green*), shown above. Now, the
term "yellow-green" is used to refer to this medium desaturated shade of
chartreuse.

The color of goose droppings is known as in French, and is a
yellowish-green shade.[24]

### Apple green

[200 px\|thumb\|left\|A [Granny Smith
apple](Granny_Smith_apple "wikilink")](/File:Granny_smith_and_cross_section.jpg "wikilink")

<table>
<caption>Apple green as a <a href="/quaternary_color" title="wikilink">quaternary color</a> on the RYB color wheel</caption>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Apple green as a [quaternary color](/quaternary_color "wikilink") on the
RYB color wheel

Displayed at right is the color **apple green**, a representation of the
color of the outer skin of a [Granny Smith
apple](/Granny_Smith_apple "wikilink"). A darker version of this color
has been used for the [IRT Lexington Avenue
Line](/IRT_Lexington_Avenue_Line "wikilink") since June 1979, when the
[NYCTA](/New_York_City_Transit_Authority "wikilink") decided to assign
line colors to all the routes within the major trunk lines in the
[Central Business District](/Central_Business_District "wikilink"), plus
different colors for services not entering
[Manhattan](/Manhattan "wikilink"). By doing this, they scrapped the
1967 colors that were assigned separately to each service.

The first recorded use of *apple green* as a color name in English was
in 1648.[25]

### Turtle green

Displayed at right is the color **turtle green**, a representation of
the color of turtles. [alt=Green sea turtle grazing on sea
grass\|thumb\|Green [sea turtle](sea_turtle "wikilink") grazing on [sea
grass](/Seagrass "wikilink")](/File:Green_Sea_Turtle_grazing_seagrass.jpg "wikilink")

### Avocado

[thumb\|200px\|left\|An
[avocado](avocado "wikilink")](/File:Avocado.jpeg "wikilink")

**Avocado** is a dark yellow-green color that is a representation of the
color of the outer surface of an [avocado](/avocado "wikilink").[26]
Avocado, along with other earthy tones like [harvest
gold](/harvest_gold "wikilink") and [burnt
orange](/burnt_orange "wikilink"), was a common color for consumer goods
like [automobiles](/automobiles "wikilink"), [shag
carpets](/Shag_(fabric) "wikilink"), and [household
appliances](/household_appliances "wikilink") during the 1970s.[27]

### Olive

[left\|thumb\|Green
[olives](olive_(fruit) "wikilink")](/File:NCI_2_green_olives.jpg "wikilink")

**Olive** is a dark shade of yellow typically seen on green
[olives](/olive_(fruit) "wikilink"). Shades of olive, such as [olive
drab](/olive_drab "wikilink") or OD green, are frequently used for
[camouflage](/camouflage "wikilink"), or by the military in general. The
[complementary color](/complementary_color "wikilink") of olive is
[light blue](/Shades_of_blue#Light_blue "wikilink").

### Kombu green

[thumb\|left\|[Kombu](Kombu "wikilink") from the kelp species
*[Saccharina japonica](/Saccharina_japonica "wikilink")*, the source of
most kombu](/File:Kombu.jpg "wikilink")

The color **kombu green** is displayed at right.

The color *kombu green* is a representation of the color of
[kombu](/kombu "wikilink"), edible [kelp](/kelp "wikilink") from the
family [Laminariaceae](/Laminariaceae "wikilink") widely eaten in [East
Asia](/East_Asia "wikilink").

The source of this color is the "[Pantone](/Pantone "wikilink") Textile
Paper eXtended (TPX)" color list, color #19-0417 TPX—Kombu Green.[28]

## Chartreuse in nature

### Algae

-   [Yellow-green algae](/Yellow-green_algae "wikilink"), also called
    *xanthophytes*, are a class of [algae](/algae "wikilink") in the
    [Heterokontophyta](/Heterokontophyta "wikilink")
    [division](/Division_(botany) "wikilink"). Most live in freshwater,
    but some are found in marine and soil habitats. They vary from
    [single-celled](/single-celled_organism "wikilink")
    [flagellates](/flagellate "wikilink") to simple
    [colonial](/Colony_(biology) "wikilink") and filamentous forms.
    Unlike other heterokonts, the
    [chloroplasts](/chloroplast "wikilink") of yellow-green algae do not
    contain [fucoxanthin](/fucoxanthin "wikilink"), which is why they
    have a lighter color.

## In popular culture

### Traffic safety

-   Chartreuse yellow is used on traffic safety vests to provide
    increased visibility for employees working near traffic. The
    [chartreuse yellow](/Chartreuse_yellow "wikilink") background
    material, together with a retro-reflective satisfy the [ANSI
    107-2010
    standard](http://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/646966O/ansi-made-easy.pdf)
    since 1999. [Traffic Safety
    vest](https://web.archive.org/web/20170922165303/http://hi-vis.net/)
    ANSI Standards were adopted as an [OSHA (Occupational Safety Health
    Administration)](http://www.osha.gov) requirement in 2008 ([23 CFR
    part
    634](http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/granule/CFR-2009-title23-vol1/CFR-2009-title23-vol1-sec634-2))

### Electronics

-   The early green LEDs are now sometimes called chartreuse to
    distinguish them from more modern, deeper-green LEDs.[29]

### Film

-   The 1960 Universal film *Chartroose Caboose* featured a "bright
    green" colored train car.[30]

### Firefighting

[thumb\|[ACT Fire and Rescue](ACT_Fire_and_Rescue "wikilink") tankers in
chartreuse green](/File:ACTFB_tankers.jpg "wikilink")

-   Since about 1973, a sort of [fluorescent](/fluorescent "wikilink")
    chartreuse green has been adopted as the color of [fire
    engines](/fire_apparatus "wikilink") in parts of the United States
    and elsewhere. The use of chartreuse fire engines began when New
    York [ophthalmologist](/ophthalmologist "wikilink") Stephen Solomon
    produced research claiming that sparkling bright lime-green paint
    would boost the night time visibility of emergency vehicles compared
    to those painted the traditional [fire engine
    red](/fire_engine_red "wikilink").[31][32] The reason for this is
    the [Purkinje effect](/Purkinje_effect "wikilink"), i.e., the
    [cones](/cone_cell "wikilink") do not function as efficiently in dim
    light, so red objects appear to be black. In Australia and New
    Zealand this form of chartreuse yellow is also known as "ACT yellow"
    as this is the color of the fire engines in the [Australian Capital
    Territory](/Australian_Capital_Territory "wikilink").

### Literature

-   In 2012, [Chelsea Handler](/Chelsea_Handler "wikilink") began to
    author a spoof on the popular book series *[50 Shades of
    Grey](/50_Shades_of_Grey "wikilink")* called *50 Shades of
    Chartreuse: This Time It's Personal*.[33]

### Music

-   Jazz and jump blues saxophonist, singer, and bandleader [Louis
    Jordan](/Louis_Jordan "wikilink") recorded the song "(You Dyed Your
    Hair) Chartreuse" in 1950. Composed by [J. Leslie
    McFarland](/John_Leslie_McFarland "wikilink") and [Billy Moore,
    Jr.](/Billy_Moore_(musician) "wikilink"), the song is about a girl
    who dyes her hair "chartreuse." Although she thinks that the color
    is "mighty cute," the speaker suggests that the change of color is a
    ridiculous act of rebellion.[34][35]
-   A song on the [Homestuck](/Homestuck "wikilink") album *The Felt* is
    named Chartreuse Rewind, in reference to the color associated with
    the album, its subject matter, and by extension the traditional
    color of the felt on a [billiards](/billiards "wikilink") table.[36]
-   American blues-rock band [ZZ Top](/ZZ_Top "wikilink") recorded a
    song called "Chartreuse" for their 2012 album *[La
    Futura](/La_Futura "wikilink")*.
-   American indie-pop duo [Capital
    Cities](/Capital_Cities_(band) "wikilink") recorded a song called
    "Chartreuse" for their 2013 album *[In a Tidal Wave of
    Mystery](/In_a_Tidal_Wave_of_Mystery "wikilink")*.
-   In [C. W. McCall](/C._W._McCall "wikilink")'s song
    "[Convoy](/Convoy_(song) "wikilink")", one of the vehicles
    participating in the convoy is a chartreuse [VW
    Microbus](/VW_Microbus "wikilink"), which is assigned by the
    singer/speaker as an escort to a truck hauling
    [dynamite](/dynamite "wikilink") (due to the microbus carrying
    "eleven long-haired friends of Jesus" and the dynamite truck needing
    "all the help it can get").
-   "Chartreuse" is a song on [Ken Nordine](/Ken_Nordine "wikilink")'s
    spoken word album [*Colors*](/Colors_(Ken_Nordine_album) "wikilink")
    (1967).

### Vexillology

-   When [Bharatpur State](/Bharatpur_State "wikilink") was a [princely
    state](/princely_state "wikilink"), it was the only political entity
    ever to have a chartreuse yellow-colored flag.[37]

### Video games

-   The Chartreuse Hall is a [hydroponics](/hydroponics "wikilink")
    section in the game *[No One Lives
    Forever](/No_One_Lives_Forever "wikilink")*, in the Low Earth Orbit
    mission.[38]

## Wrapping the spectrum into a color wheel

If the visible spectrum is wrapped to form a color wheel, chartreuse
(additive tertiary) appears midway between [yellow](/yellow "wikilink")
and [green](/green "wikilink"):
[center](/File:Linear_visible_spectrum.svg "wikilink")
[center\|300px\|thumb\|Visible spectrum wrapped to join green and yellow
in an additive mixture of
chartreuse](/File:Blended_colour_wheel.svg "wikilink")

## See also

-   [Lime (color)](/Lime_(color) "wikilink")
-   [List of colors](/List_of_colors "wikilink")

## References

## External links

[Category:Tertiary colors](/Category:Tertiary_colors "wikilink")
[Category:Quaternary colors](/Category:Quaternary_colors "wikilink")
[Category:Shades of green](/Category:Shades_of_green "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] Kleiner, Fred S. (2010). *Art Through the Ages*, 13th ed., Boston:
Wadsworth/Cengage, p. 398.

[5]

[6] \[<https://books.google.com/books?id=EY5EAQAAMAAJ> *The Domestic
Monthly:\] An Illustrated Magazine of Fashion, Literature, and the
Domestic Arts* (1885) Vol. 23, pp. 162, 237, 368, Blake and Company, New
York

[7] "New Fashions" (May 1889) [*The Ladies' Home
Journal*](https://books.google.com/books?id=yakiAQAAMAAJ), Vol. 6, No.
6, p. 14, Philadelphia

[8] [*The Millinery Trade
Review*](https://books.google.com/books?id=jQZQAAAAYAAJ) (Sep 1889) Vol.
14, No. 9, p. 18

[9] "The Identification of Gems" (1898) [*The Mineral
Industry*](https://books.google.com/books?id=dHQmAQAAIAAJ), Vol. 7, p.
283, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York and London

[10] "Latest Spring Millinery" (Apr 22, 1905) [*Dry Goods
Reporter*](https://books.google.com/books?id=m5Y7AQAAMAAJ) Vol. 35, No.
16 p. 33, Chicago

[11] "The Coloration of Liqueurs" (1910) [*Pure
Products*](https://books.google.com/books?id=rSZIAAAAYAAJ), Vol. 6, No.
1, p. 278, Scientific Station for Pure Products, New York

[12] Gladys and Gustav Plochere (Dec 15, 1948) *Plochere Color System in
Book Form, a Guide to Color and Color Harmony*, Los Angeles

[13] [*Billboard*](https://books.google.com/books?id=Qh8EAAAAMBAJ) (Mar
24, 1956) p. 85

[14] Kenneth Low Kelly, Deane Brewster Judd (1976) *Color: Universal
Language and Dictionary of Names*, p. 58, U.S. Department of Commerce,
National Bureau of Standards;

[15] See the 1930s version of "Chartreuse green" in the index and color
samples, a color not as green as the web color chartreuse, but greener
than chartreuse yellow--actually it is a representation of the actual
color of green chartreuse liqueur. The first recorded use of *chartreuse
green* as a color name in [English](/English_language "wikilink") was in
1926--Maerz and Paul *A Dictionary of Color* Page 192; Color sample of
Chartreuse Green: Page 47 Plate 12 Color Sample L2

[16] "Fashion Confusion" (June 20, 1988) *New York Magazine*, Vol. 21,
No. 25

[17] Aloys John Maerz; Morris Rea Paul (1930) *A Dictionary of Color*,
p. 192, New York: McGraw-Hill

[18] Robert Ridgway (1912) [*Color Standards and Color
Nomenclature*](https://books.google.com/books?id=INATAAAAYAAJ), p. 67,
Published by the author, Washington D.C.

[19] Maerz and Paul *A Dictionary of Color* New York:1930 McGraw-Hill
Page 197; Color Sample of Nyanza: Page 61 Plate 19 Color Sample C4 Note:
This color originated as a textile color, as indicated by the small T
after the name in the index.

[20] *[The Daily News](/The_Daily_News_(UK) "wikilink")* (London) 14
July 1890.

[21]

[22] Maerz and Paul *A Dictionary of Color* New York:1930 McGraw-Hill
Page 205; Color Sample of Spring Green: Page 59 Plate 18 Color Sample J7

[23] Maerz and Paul *A Dictionary of Color* New York:1930 McGraw-Hill
Page 202; Color Sample of Pistachio Green: Page 61 Plate 19 Color Sample
C6

[24]

[25] Maerz and Paul *A Dictionary of Color* New York:1930 McGraw-Hill
Page 189; Color Sample of Apple Green: Page 61 Plate 19 Color Sample J6

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33] ["Chelsea Handler to write '50 Shades of
Chartreuse{{'"}}](https://www.usatoday.com/life/books/story/2012/09/18/chelsea-handler-to-write-50-shades-of-chartreuse/57801518/1)
(Sep 18, 2012) *USA Today*

[34] Jordan, Louis. "(You Dyed Your Hair) Chartreuse)." By J. Leslie
McFarland and Blly Moore. *Let the Good Times Roll: The Anthology
1938-1953.* Rec. 1950. MCA, 1999.

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]