---
title: Mountbatten pink
permalink: /Mountbatten_pink/
---

**Mountbatten pink**, also called **Plymouth Pink**,[1] is a [naval
camouflage](/Ship_camouflage "wikilink") [colour](/colour "wikilink")
resembling [greyish](/grey "wikilink") [mauve](/mauve "wikilink"). It
was first used by [Lord Mountbatten](/Louis_Mountbatten "wikilink") of
the British [Royal Navy](/Royal_Navy "wikilink") during [World War
II](/World_War_II "wikilink"). After noticing a [Union-Castle
Line](/Union-Castle_Line "wikilink") ship with a similar camouflage
colour disappearing from sight, he applied the colour to his own ships,
believing the colour would render his ships difficult to see during dawn
and dusk. While the colour was met with anecdotal success, it was judged
by experts to be equivalent to neutral greys at best and would make
ships with the colour more obvious at worst.

## History

In 1940, while escorting a [convoy](/convoy "wikilink"), Lord
Mountbatten noted that one ship in the group vanished from view much
earlier than the remainder. The ship, a Union-Castle liner, was painted
[lavender](/lavender_(color) "wikilink") mauve grey. Mountbatten thus
became convinced of the colour's effectiveness as a camouflage during
dawn and dusk, often dangerous times for ships, and had all of the
[destroyers](/destroyer "wikilink") of his flotilla painted with a
similar pigment, which he created by mixing a medium grey with a small
amount of [Venetian Red](/Venetian_Red "wikilink"). By early 1941,
several other ships began using the same camouflage, though no formal
testing was done to determine how well it worked.[2][3]

A later refinement of the basic Mountbatten pink camouflage was the use
of a slightly lighter tone of the same colour for the upper structures
of the ship. By the end of 1942, however, all vessels of destroyer size
and larger had dispensed with Mountbatten pink,[4] although it is
believed that smaller vessels retained this colour until well into 1944.
The primary problem with Mountbatten pink was that it stood out around
midday, when the sky was no longer pink, and the traditional [battleship
grey](/battleship_grey "wikilink") was much less visible.[5]

The [US Navy](/US_Navy "wikilink") had experimented with a similar shade
of paint as well, and at least one ship, the [USS
*Winslow*](/USS_Winslow_(DD-359) "wikilink"), received such a paint
job.[6]

The [Kriegsmarine](/Kriegsmarine "wikilink") likewise experimented with
a light pink shade. The Royal Navy prisoner interrogation report of crew
rescued from S 147, a [Schnellboot](/Schnellboot "wikilink") sunk in the
English Channel in April 1944, states they believed the boat's overall
pink shade was effective.[7]

## Usefulness

One of the anecdotal and possibly [apocryphal](/apocryphal "wikilink")
tales told in support of Mountbatten pink was the story of the cruiser
[HMS *Kenya*](/HMS_Kenya "wikilink") (nicknamed "The Pink Lady" at the
time due to her Mountbatten pink paint), which during [Operation
Archery](/Operation_Archery "wikilink") covered a commando raid against
installations on [Vågsøy Island](/Vågsøy "wikilink") off the
[Norwegian](/Norway "wikilink") coast. The Germans fired on the *Kenya*
for several minutes with coastal guns but she sustained only minor
damage from near misses.[8] This was attributed to her Mountbatten pink
camouflage blending in with the pink marker dye the Germans were using
in their shells, preventing German spotters from distinguishing between
shell splashes and the ship.[9] Stories like this, and personal
experience of ships with the colour disappearing from view, made crews
of ships with the colour notable supporters.[10]

Camouflage experts have noted that the colour may make ships more
obvious as a result of the [Purkinje
effect](/Purkinje_effect "wikilink"). These experts also often
complained about uncontrolled mixing, which could result in mixtures
containing more red than intended; such a mixture could be disastrous,
as ships with even the slightest red tone attracted more attention than
those with an equivalent tone of blue in almost every light level. An
[Admiralty](/Admiralty "wikilink") handbook concluded that the paint was
"neither more nor less effective in sea-going camouflage than neutral
greys of equivalent tone; and, further, that if the red content were
high enough for the particular characteristics of red to have any
effect, the colour would generally hinder rather than aid
concealment".[11]

## References

[Category:Military camouflage](/Category:Military_camouflage "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]