---
title: Aviator sunglasses
permalink: /Aviator_sunglasses/
---

**Aviator sunglasses** are a style of sunglasses that were developed by
Bausch & Lomb. The original Bausch & Lomb design is now marketed as
**Ray-Ban Aviators**, although other manufacturers also produce
aviator-style sunglasses.

## Design

They are characterised by dark, often reflective lenses having an area
two or three times of area of the eyeball, and very thin metal frames
with double or triple bridge (so-called ″bullet hole″) and bayonet
earpieces or flexible cable temples that hook behind the ears. The
original design featured G-15 tempered glass lenses, transmitting 15% of
incoming light. The large lenses are not flat but slightly convex. The
design attempts to cover the entire range of the human eye and prevent
as much light as possible from entering the eye from any angle.

## History

General MacArthur's signature look included his ornate hat, corncob
pipe, and aviator sunglasses. (1944) Aviator sunglasses, or "pilot's
glasses", were originally developed in 1936 by Bausch & Lomb for pilots
to protect their eyes while flying, thus the name aviator. This style of
sunglasses is credited with being one of the first popularized style of
sunglasses to be developed. In its military usage, the sunglasses
replaced the outmoded flight goggles used previously, as they were
lighter, thinner, and “more elegantly designed”. Writing about the
transition of aviators from military gear to a commercial product,
Vanessa Brown wrote that, “The War was a … revelation of the sheer
might, scale, power, and horror of the modern world … necessitated a new
kind of military demeanor and gave rise to new definitions of the heroic
stance which was to have a profound influence on modern fashion.”
Eventually, the aviator sunglasses produced by Bausch & Lomb were
trademarked as “Ray Bans”.

Aviators became a well-known style of sunglasses when General Douglas
MacArthur landed on a beach in the Philippines in World War II and
newspaper photographers snapped several pictures of him wearing them
that became a lasting image of the Second World War. Bausch & Lomb
dedicated a line of sunglasses to him in 1987.

## Commercial designs

The first advertisements for Ray-Ban aviators stated they would provide
“real scientific glare protection” and were sold as sporting equipment.
At this time, they had not yet taken on their name of “aviators”, the
Second World War having not yet begun. In addition to popularity in the
1950s, aviators were popular in the 1970s and 1980s, being worn by
public figures like Michael Jackson, Tom Cruise, Freddie Mercury, Jeff
Lynne, Roger Waters and Elvis Presley. During the 1950s, aviator
sunglasses were a part of the cultural style, mimicking military style.
[Category:Facewear](/Category:Facewear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")