---
title: Browline glasses
permalink: /Browline_glasses/
---

**Browline glasses** are a style of eyeglass frames which were very
popular during the 1950s and 1960s, especially in the United States of
America. The name derives from the fact that the "bold" upper part of
the frames frame the lenses in the same way that eyebrows frame the
eyes. The glasses were first manufactured by Shuron Ltd in 1947 under
the "Ronsir" brand, and quickly emulated by various other manufacturers.
The design became the most common style of eyeglasses throughout the
1950s and the early 1960s before it was surpassed in popularity by solid
plastic styles. Browlines enjoyed a renaissance as sunglasses in the
1980s before returning to popularity in the 2010s, with the rise of
retro style and the hipster subculture.

## Description

Browline glasses are constructed in such a way that the upper portion of
the frame is thicker than the lower portion, simulating additional
eyebrows or otherwise drawing attention to the wearer's natural brow
line.

The most common means of construction is for the upper portion of the
frame (the "brows" or "caps") and temples to be made of plastic, with
the remainder of the frame (the bridge and eyewires, or "chassis") to be
made of metal. The chassis inserts into the brows and is held in place
by way of a series of screws. For a period in the 1960s, numerous models
emerged in which the brows were constructed from aluminium; following
the style's resurgence in the 2000s, browlines made wholly out of one
type of metal with less pronounced brow portions became popular.

### Monobrowlines

Monobrowlines are a variant of browlines in which the bridge is
contiguous with the caps, creating a solid, unbroken line across the top
of the frame. The style dates back to the Shuron Stag, a browline
prototype, which enjoyed some brief popularity before being replaced by
the Ronsir as Shuron's flagship frame. The original stag had no metal
chassis: the lenses were mounted directly to the brow caps via two sets
of screws. Although the style was never popular in the United States, it
became particularly fashionable in Europe and England in the 1960s as
part of Amor's Spotlite line. The modern monobrowline originated in the
1980s, as part of an effort by Bausch and Lomb to diversify their
Ray-Ban sunglass collection with the *Wayfarer Max,* a fusion of the
then-popular Wayfarer and Clubmaster sunglass models. The style proved
unpopular and was quickly phased out. The monobrowline design was
resurrected by a variety of manufacturers in the 2010s (chiefly Oakley)
after browlines returned to popularity. Unlike its tenure in the 1980s,
monobrowlines proved to be a popular variant among eyeglass wearers in
the 2010s.

## History

### 1940s – 1960s

Browline glasses were invented in 1947 by Jack Rohrbach, then
vice-president of Shuron Ltd., an eyeglass company. The first browlines
– sold under the "Ronsir" model name – were made out of interchangeable
bridges, eyewires, and "brows," allowing wearers to completely customize
the size, fit, and color of their glasses. At the time, most frame
manufacturers offered a limited number of colors and sizes, making
browlines a unique means of customizing one's personal appearance. The
style quickly caught on in popularity amongst eyeglass wearers,
resulting in numerous other companies releasing their own browline
frames. Most notably, Art-Craft Optical produced the "Art-Rim" brand,
which offered designs for both men (under the "Clubman" models) and
women (under the "Leading Lady" models), making the style unisex. Though
numerous companies manufactured their own versions of browlines, through
the 1960s, six manufacturers in particular dominated the browline
market: Shuron, Art-Craft Optical, Victory Optical, American Optical,
and Bausch and Lomb (which branded the model as the **Ray-Ban
Browline**); each company differentiated their frames through unique
plaques on the upper corners of the frames, which sometimes also served
to cover the rivets attaching the temples to the frame.

The style continued to rise in popularity throughout the 1950s, with
different manufacturers modifying the original browline design in order
to compete. Art-Craft and Victory Optical introduced aluminum browlines,
which replaced the plastic brows with aluminum caps, drastically
decreasing the frame's weight. Shuron began modifying the original
browline shape, beginning with the rectangular "Rondon" model, to appeal
to individuals of all face shapes. For a period in the 1950s, plastic
brows designed to emulate wood grains became popular, with Victory
Optical offering models that allowed wearers to switch off the caps to
coordinate to different outfits. Ultimately, browline glasses accounted
for half of all eyeglasses sold and worn in the 1950s. As a result, many
famous figures from the mid-20th century are pictured wearing browlines,
including black liberationist Malcolm X, Kentucky Fried Chicken founder
Colonel Sanders, Lyndon B. Johnson (most notably in his national
statement regarding the signing of the 1964 Civil Rights Act), Vince
Lombardi, Josemaría Escrivá, Josip Broz Tito (President of Yugoslavia)
and others.

Browlines continued to remain popular through the 1960s, but their
market influence slowly waned throughout the decade as advances in
plastics manufacturing offered wearers even further frame customization
via solid plastic eyeglasses, which could now be made in more shapes,
sizes, and colors than in the past. Wearers who wished to wear plastic
frames but still liked the browline style flocked to "plastic
browlines," plastic glasses with transparent lower portions and solid
upper portions, which became a major frame style of the 1960s.

### 1970s – 1990s

In 1971, Shuron sold their sixteen-millionth pair of Ronsirs. However,
the general backlash against the culture and fashion of the 1950s and
1960s which had begun with the hippie subculture led to a rapid decline
in the popularity of browlines, which had come to carry undesirable
conformist connotations. The style remained unpopular through the end of
1978, except among conservatives and the elderly. Demand suddenly rose
between 1978 and 1980, as the anti-disco backlash affected the
until-then popular Aviators and Teashades, which became associated with
the fashion of the time. The rise also boosted the Wayfarer model, which
like the Ronsirs were about to be phased out in the early 1980s. About
12,000 pairs were sold in 1982. Five years earlier less than 5,000 were
purchased. However, by 1987 figures amounted for over 500,000.

In the mid-1980s, Bruce Willis wore a pair of Shuron Ronsirs with tinted
lenses on the series *Moonlighting*, leading to a surge in demand for
browline sunglasses. In response, Ray-Ban, which already dominated the
sunglasses market with their Wayfarers and Aviator sunglasses,
introduced the Clubmaster, a traditional browline frame with sunglass
lenses, and the Wayfarer Max, a Wayfarer shaped-and-sized browline. The
Clubmaster went on to become the third best selling sunglasses style of
the 1980s, behind the Wayfarer and aviator. Bob Geldof can also be seen
wearing a pair of browline sunglasses that look to be Clubmasters in the
1982 Pink Floyd movie The Wall.

Browlines (and plastic glasses in general) were deeply affected by the
backlash against the 1980s consumer culture, and carried a variety of
stigmas during the 1990s, variously identifying the wearer as a nerd,
geek, elderly, or a devotee of far-right politics; the 1993 film
*Falling Down* in particular helped to cement an association between
browlines and the "angry white male".

### 2000s onwards

During the 2000s, browlines were still seen as overtly conformist or
"nerdy" and were still associated with 1950s culture and fashion.

The influence of the television series *Mad Men* on the fashion world
led to several eyeglass manufacturers offering browlines in order to
meet demand for 1960s inspired frames. Major characters on several
television series in the late 2000s and early 2010s were seen wearing
browlines, including *Mad Men*, *Heroes* (on which the style worn by
character Noah Bennet was erroneously identified as "horn rimmed
glasses"), *American Horror Story*, and *CSI: Crime Scene
Investigation*.

By 2013, of the major companies that produced browlines during the
height of their popularity, only Shuron and Victory Optical still
manufacture them. Shuron is the only company to have constantly produced
browlines since their inception; Victory Optical shut down for a period
in the 1980s-1990s before resuming manufacture in the 2000s. Art-Craft
optical still features the Clubman model on their webpage, although the
company no longer manufactures the frame, and now only sells remaining
parts from the factory.
[Category:Headwear](/Category:Headwear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")