---
title: GI glasses
permalink: /GI_glasses/
---

**GI glasses** are eyeglasses issued by the American military to its
service members. Dysphemisms for them include the most common "birth
control glasses" (also called "BCGs") and other variants. At one time,
they were officially designated as *regulation prescription glasses*, or
*RPGs*. This was commonly said to mean "rut prevention glasses" due to
their unstylish appearance.

## History

The original version was designed for use with gas masks during World
War II. It was wire-rimmed with cable temples and a "P3" lens shape. The
design was a modification of the style used by the British military.

After World War II, the material was switched from nickel alloy wire to
cellulose acetate. Initially gray cellulose acetate was used, but this
was discontinued in 1968, with remaining stocks issued until exhausted.
The replacement frames used black cellulose acetate.

In the late 1970s, the lens shape was re-designed to the "S9". Black
"S9" frames were released for a brief period, before brown cellulose
acetate replaced the black. The brown cellulose acetate frames were
discontinued in 2012, and a new smaller unisex lens shape, the "5A", was
introduced, with a black frame. The modern "5A" shape was designed by
Rochester Optical, who is the exclusive manufacturer of the R-5A frame.

GI glasses are issued at government expense to new recruits at recruit
training or Officer Candidate Schools in the United States military.
When entering recruit training, service members may wear civilian
glasses until government-issued ones are assigned, including but not
limited to the BCG. Contact lenses are never permissible for these
exercises. After recruit training, service members are permitted to wear
Frame of Choice glasses which are conservative in design and color or
contact lenses. The military offers annual replacements for those who
qualify, and personnel may request the government issued glasses in
addition to several varieties of more attractive eyewear, in clear and
tinted lenses, as well as prescription gas mask inserts and inserts for
government-funded ballistic eyewear.
[Category:Headwear](/Category:Headwear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")