---
title: Glasses
permalink: /Glasses/
---

**Glasses**, also known as **eyeglasses** or **spectacles**, are vision
aids, consisting of glass or hard plastic lenses mounted in a frame that
holds them in front of a person's eyes, typically using a bridge over
the nose and arms which rest over the ears.

In the 1930s, "spectacles" were described as "medical appliances."
Wearing spectacles was sometimes considered socially humiliating. In the
1970s, fashionable glasses started to become available through
manufacturers, and governments also recognized the demand for stylized
eyewear.

Graham Pullin describes how devices for disability, like glasses, have
traditionally been designed to camouflage against the skin and restore
ability without being visible. In the past, design for disability has
"been less about projecting a positive image as about trying not to
project an image at all." Pullin uses the example of spectacles,
traditionally categorized as a medical device for "patients", and
outlines how they are now described as eyewear: a fashionable accessory.
Much like other fashion designs and accessories, eyewear is created by
designers, has reputable labels, and comes in collections, by season and
designer. It is becoming more common for consumers to purchase eyewear
with clear, non-prescription lenses, illustrating that glasses are no
longer a social stigma, but a fashionable accessory that "frames your
face."

#### Personal image

For most of their history, eyeglasses were seen as unfashionable, and
carried several potentially negative connotations: wearing glasses
caused individuals to be stigmatized and stereotyped as pious clergymen
(as those in religious vocation were the most likely to be literate and
therefore the most likely to need reading glasses), elderly, or
physically weak and passive. The stigma began to fall away in the early
1900s when the popular Theodore Roosevelt was regularly photographed
wearing eyeglasses, and in the 1910s when popular comedian Harold Lloyd
began wearing a pair of horn-rimmed glasses as the "Glasses" character
in his films. Former United States senator Barry Goldwater in
horn-rimmed glasses Since eyeglasses have become an acceptable fashion
item and often act as a key component in individuals' personal image.
Musicians Buddy Holly and John Lennon became synonymous with the styles
of eye-glasses they wore to the point that thick, black horn-rimmed
glasses are often called "Buddy Holly glasses" and perfectly round metal
eyeglass frames called "John Lennon (or Harry Potter) Glasses." British
comedic actor Eric Sykes was known in the United Kingdom for wearing
thick, square, horn-rimmed glasses, which were, in fact, a sophisticated
hearing aid that alleviated his deafness by allowing him to "hear"
vibrations. Some celebrities have become so associated with their
eyeglasses that they continued to wear them even after taking alternate
measures against vision problems: United States Senator Barry Goldwater
and comedian Drew Carey continued to wear non-prescription glasses after
being fitted for contacts and getting laser eye surgery, respectively.

Other celebrities have used glasses to differentiate themselves from the
characters they play, such as Anne Kirkbride, who wore oversized,
1980s-style round horn-rimmed glasses as Deirdre Barlow in the soap
opera *Coronation Street*, and Masaharu Morimoto, who wears glasses to
separate his professional persona as a chef from his stage persona as
Iron Chef Japanese. In 2012 some NBA players wear lensless glasses with
thick plastic frames like horn-rimmed glasses during post-game
interviews, geek chic that draws comparisons to actor Jaleel White's
infamous styling as TV character Steve Urkel.

In superhero fiction, eyeglasses have become a standard component of
various heroes' disguises (as masks), allowing them to adopt a
nondescript demeanor when they are not in their superhero personae:
Superman is well known for wearing 1950s style horn-rimmed glasses as
Clark Kent, while Wonder Woman wears either round, Harold Lloyd style
glasses or 1970s style bug-eye glasses as Diana Prince. An example of
the halo effect is seen in the stereotype that those who wear glasses
are intelligent. This belief can have positive consequences for people
who wear glasses, for example in elections. Studies show that wearing
glasses increases politiciansâ€™ electoral success, at least in Western
cultures.

#### Styles

In the 20th century, eyeglasses came to be considered a component of
fashion; as such, various different styles have come in and out of
popularity. Most are still in regular use, albeit with varying degrees
of frequency.

-   Aviator sunglasses
-   Browline glasses
-   Bug-eye glasses
-   Cat eye glasses
-   GI glasses
-   Goggles
-   Horn-rimmed glasses
-   Lensless glasses
-   Pince-nez
-   Rimless glasses
-   Sunglasses
-

[Category:Headwear](/Category:Headwear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")