---
title: Horn-rimmed glasses
permalink: /Horn-rimmed_glasses/
---

**Horn-rimmed glasses** are a type of eyeglasses. Originally made out of
either horn or tortoise shell, for most of their history they have
actually been constructed out of thick plastics designed to imitate
those materials. They are characterized by their bold appearance on the
wearer's face, in contrast to metal frames, which appear less
pronounced.

Horn-rimmed glasses were one of the first styles of eyeglasses to become
a popular fashion item, after comedian Harold Lloyd began wearing a
round pair in his films. The glasses have enjoyed various periods of
popularity throughout the 20th century, being considered especially
fashionable in the 1920s–1930s and in the 1950s–1960s in particular,
while ceding to rimless and wire framed glasses during the 1970s and
1990s–2000s. The style has brought a resurgence of popularity in the
late 20th (1980s–1990s) and early 21st (2010s) centuries, with an
emphasis on retro fashions. This may be due in part from the influence
of hipster subculture, and the television series *Mad Men*, which
repopularized 1960s fashions in general.

## Contents

## History

Horn rim glasses were initially popularized by comedian Harold Lloyd
after he wore them in his 1917 comedy short *Over the Fence.* Lloyd had
risen to fame playing an eccentric named Lonesome Luke, characterized by
an ostentatious appearance. In an effort to break away from the
character and revitalize his career, Lloyd crafted a new character who
would be Luke's opposite and made distinct by a nondescript appearance.
Lloyd outfitted himself in clothing popular among Americans in the
1910s, completing the ensemble with a pair of round, horn-rimmed glasses
that would solidify the character's status as "ordinary." Glasses
wearing had long been stigmatized, with wearers stereotyped as
physically weak intellectuals, members of the clergy, or simply elderly;
President Theodore Roosevelt's wearing of rimless eyeglasses had only
recently begun to eliminate the stigma, albeit with glasses designed to
minimize their appearance.

Lloyd named the character "The Glasses Character" or "The Glass
Character" after the frames; the lenses themselves had in fact been
removed, both because Lloyd did not require glasses to see, and because
studio lights reflecting off of the lenses obscured Lloyd's eyes on
film. The character proved to be a tremendous success with audiences and
resulted in an unexpected rise in popularity of horn-rimmed glasses:
sales around the world rose as the popular Lloyd's appearance wearing
glasses helped to dispel negative stereotypes of glasses wearers. When
Lloyd ultimately broke the frames and attempted to order a new pair from
the manufacturer, his check was returned along with an order of twenty
frames and a note from the company thanking him for his endorsement.
Explaining his reasons for the glasses, as well as their sartorial
advantages, Lloyd said: "They make low-comedy clothes unnecessary,
permit enough romantic appeal to catch the feminine eye, usually
diverted from comedies, and they hold me down to no particular type or
range of story."

Horn-rimmed glasses were popular in the 1920s but steadily lost their
appeal as sturdier metal styles became more economic alternatives during
the Depression. Exposure to heat and sunlight rendered the plastic
brittle and prone to breakage, often to the point that they would break
should an optician attempt to install new lenses. Comparison of browline
(left) and horn-rimmed glasses A variant of horn-rimmed glasses,
browline glasses, became one of the defining eyeglass styles of the
1940s and 1950s. Invented in 1947, the style combined the aesthetics of
horn-rimmed glasses with the stability of metal frames by fitting
prominent plastic "brows" over the tops of metal frames, creating a
distinctive look that was also sturdier than solid plastic frames.
Browlines quickly became popular in post-World War II America, and
composed half of all eyeglass sales throughout the 1950s. Ray-Ban
introduced the Wayfarer sunglasses in 1952.

Plastic eyeglasses mounted in popularity throughout the 1950s and into
the 1960s, ultimately supplanting tortoiseshell as the most popular
material for eyeglass frames. Buddy Holly iconisized the horn-rimmed
style, with his upbeat pop culture rock and roll music. The trend died
out in the 1970s with a backlash against 50s and 60s culture, as
oversized metal glasses in the style of the Ray-Ban Aviator became
popular. Semi-round horn-rimmed glasses came back into fashion in the
1980s, with tortoiseshell being fashionable amongst entrepreneurs and
"yuppies". Wayfarers were popular among New Wave musicians, which
popularized them among the late 1970s anti-disco "resistance".

Horn-rimmed glasses fell back out of fashion in the 1990s but returned
to popularity with the rise of the emo and hipster subcultures in the
early 2000s. Many glasses manufactured during this period tended to
imitate popular metal eyeglass styles, with significantly thinner frames
and vertically smaller lenses. The popularization of 1960s styles by the
television show *Mad Men* led to horn-rimmed frames produced in the
2010s being more traditional, with large lenses and thick, heavy frames.
[Category:Headwear](/Category:Headwear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")