---
title: Monocle
permalink: /Monocle/
---

A **monocle** is a type of corrective lens used to correct or enhance
the visual perception in only one eye. It consists of a circular lens,
generally with a wire ring around the circumference that can be attached
to a string or wire. The other end of the string is then connected to
the wearer's clothing to avoid losing the monocle. The antiquarian
Philipp von Stosch wore a monocle in Rome in the 1720s, in order to
closely examine engravings and antique engraved gems, but the monocle
did not become an article of gentlemen's apparel until the nineteenth
century. It was introduced by the dandy's **quizzing glass** of the
1790s, as a sense of high fashion.

## Styles

An early-20th-century gold-filled monocle with gallery There are three
styles of monocle. The first style consists of a simple loop of metal
with a lens which was slotted into the eye orbit. These were the first
monocles worn in England and could be found from the 1830s onwards. The
second style, which was developed in the 1890s, was the most elaborate,
consisting of a frame with a raised edge-like extension known as the
*gallery*. The gallery was designed to help secure the monocle in place
by raising it out of the eye's orbit slightly, so that the eyelashes
would not jar it. Monocles with galleries were often the most expensive.
The very wealthy would have the frames custom-made to fit their eye
sockets. A sub-category of the galleried monocle was the "sprung
gallery", where the gallery was replaced by an incomplete circle of
flattened, ridged wire supported by three posts. The ends were pulled
together, the monocle was placed in the eye orbit, and the ends
released, causing the gallery to spring out and keep the monocle in
place. The third style of monocle was frameless. This consisted of a cut
piece of glass, with a serrated edge to provide a grip and sometimes a
hole drilled into one side for a cord. Often the frameless monocle had
no cord and would be worn freely. This style was popular at the
beginning of the 20th century as the lens could be cut to fit any shape
eye orbit inexpensively, without the cost of a customized frame.

It is a myth that wearing a monocle is uncomfortable. If customised,
monocles could be worn securely with little effort. However, periodic
adjustment is a fact of life for monocle wearers to keep the monocle
from popping, as can be seen in films featuring Erich von Stroheim.
Often only the rich could afford to have a monocle custom-fabricated,
while the poor had to settle for ill-fitting monocles that were both
less comfortable and less secure. The popular perception was (and still
is) that a monocle could easily fall off with the wrong facial
expression. This is true to an extent, as raising the eyebrow too far
will allow the monocle to fall. 19th-century gold-filled quizzing glass
A once-standard comedic device exploits this: an upper-class gentleman
affects a shocked expression in response to some event, and his monocle
falls into his drink, or smashes to pieces on the floor, etc. Another
myth is that Abraham Lincoln wore a monocle. It has also been said that
he created his own style of monocle and wore it when he was away from
the public or very rarely when in public.

The quizzing glass should not be confused with a monocle, since it is
held to one's eye with a handle in a fashion similar to a lorgnette. A
quizzing glass is not held by the eye socket itself.

## Wearers

During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the monocle was generally
associated with wealthy upper-class men. Combined with a morning coat
and a top hat, the monocle completed the costume of the stereotypical
1890s capitalist. Monocles were also accessories of German military
officers from this period; especially from World War I and World War II.
German military officers known to have worn a monocle include Hans
Krebs, Werner von Fritsch, Erich Ludendorff, Walter Model, Walter von
Reichenau, Dietrich von Saucken, Hans von Seeckt, and Hugo Sperrle.

Monocles were most prevalent in the late 19th century, but are rarely
worn today. This is due in large part to advances in optometry which
allow for better measurement of refractive error, so that glasses and
contact lenses can be prescribed with different strengths in each eye.

The monocle did, however, gain a following in the stylish lesbian
circles of the early 20th century, when lesbians would wear a monocle
for effect. Such women included Una Lady Troubridge, Radclyffe Hall, and
Weimar German reporter Sylvia von Harden. (The painting *Portrait of the
Journalist Sylvia Von Harden* by German expressionist painter Otto Dix
depicts its subject wearing a monocle.)

Famous figures who wore a monocle include British politicians Joseph
Chamberlain, his son Austen, Henry Chaplin, and Angus Maude. Percy
Toplis (The Monocled Mutineer), founder of Pakistan Mohammad Ali Jinnah,
Portuguese President António de Spínola, filmmakers Fritz Lang and Erich
von Stroheim, prominent 19th-century Portuguese writer Eça de Queiroz,
Soviet writer Mikhail Bulgakov, actor Conrad Veidt, Dadaists Tristan
Tzara and Raoul Hausmann, esotericist Julius Evola, French
collaborationist politician Louis Darquier de Pellepoix, Poet laureate
Alfred Lord Tennyson, singer Richard Tauber, diplomat Christopher
Ewart-Biggs (a smoked-glass monocle, to disguise his glass eye), Major
Johnnie Cradock, actors Ralph Lynn, George Arliss and Martyn Green, and
Karl Marx. In another vein, G. E. M. Anscombe was one of only a few
noted women who occasionally wore a monocle. Famous wearers of the 21st
century so far include astronomer Sir Patrick Moore, and former boxer
Chris Eubank. Abstract expressionist painter Barnett Newman wore a
monocle mainly for getting a closer look at artworks. Richard Tauber
wore a monocle to mask a squint in one eye.

### In popular culture

Fictional characters that wear monocles include Planters mascot Mr.
Peanut, aristocratic 1920s sleuth Lord Peter Wimsey, the P. G. Wodehouse
character Psmith, Batman antagonist the Penguin, and *Avengers*
antagonist and leader of HYDRA Baron Wolfgang Von Strucker. Count von
Count from the children's program *Sesame Street* wears a monocle. The
*New Yorker* mascot Eustace Tilley, an early 19th-century dandy, is
depicted using a monocle like a quizzing glass. A monocle is also a
distinctive part of the costume of at least three Gilbert & Sullivan
characters: Major-General Stanley in *The Pirates of Penzance*, Sir
Joseph Porter in *H.M.S. Pinafore*, and Reginald Bunthorne in
*Patience*, and composer Sullivan used one himself. In some variant
productions, numerous other characters wear the distinctive eyewear, and
some noted performers of the "G&S" repertoire also have worn a monocle.
The Doctor as played by William Hartnell wore one. On the Mr Men
franchise, Mr. Uppity wears a monocle. On many of the works of Osamu
Tezuka including *Black Jack*, *Astro Boy*, Doctor Yorkshire Bell wears
a monacle. On *Babar*, Pompadour wears a monacle. On *Super Robot Monkey
Team Hyperforce Go!*, the rogue human turned cybernetic being Lord
Scrappeton owns a monocle which he wears and replaces with a
cyber-version when he gained a robotic body. The French gentleman thief
Arsene Lupin is commonly said to have a monocle, and is illustrated with
it on whenever not under a disguise. Edgar Bergen's famous dummy Charlie
McCarthy wore a monocle and was normally attired in formal wear. Werner
Klemperer as Kommandant Wilhelm Klink in *Hogan's Heroes* usually wore
one in his left eye. Doc Savage aide 'Johnny' Littlejohn wore a monocle,
as he was blind in one eye. Also, in *The Calculus Affair* and *Tintin
and the Picaros*, Colonel Sponsz can be seen wearing a monocle. Momo
Kawashima from the anime series Girls und Panzer wears a monocle akin to
one half of a pair of glasses. Captain Good, a character in the book
*King Solomon's Mines*, wore a monocle. Remote natives thought it was
part of his eye, giving credence to his claim that he was a god.
[Category:Facewear](/Category:Facewear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")