---
title: Rimless eyeglasses
permalink: /Rimless_eyeglasses/
---

**Rimless eyeglasses,** are a type of eyeglasses in which the lenses are
mounted directly to the bridge and/or temples. The style is divided into
two subtypes: **three-piece glasses** are composed of lenses mounted to
a bridge and two separate temple arms, while **rimways** (also called
*cortlands*) feature a supporting arch that connects the temples to the
bridge and provides extra stability for the lenses.

Rimless glasses were a popular style of eyeglasses from the 1880s until
into the 1960s, and re-emerged in popularity in the latter part of the
20th century and early 21st century. Apple founder and former CEO Steve
Jobs wore round rimless eyeglasses for 18 years, from 1993 until his
death in 2011.

Despite these shifts, they are unique among eyeglass styles in that they
have never gone completely out of fashion, remaining an acceptable
alternative through the years to more stylish designs.

## Mounting methods

Rimless glasses lenses are held in place (or "mounted") by way of a
series of screws, or hollow plastic double rivets (called "bushings" or
"compression plugs") that fit into two holes in the lens. When bushings
are used, the temples and bridge have barbed metal pins that lock into
the bushings, creating a pressure seal that holds the lenses in place.
Although they are more cosmetically appealing, the bushing method is
more fragile than the screw and nut method, and more difficult for
laypersons to repair themselves in the event of loosening or breakage.
Bushing based rimless mounts are, however, designed so that the pins can
pull out of the lenses without causing damage, which reduces repair cost
and duration.

## History

### Origins

The template for rimless eyeglasses date back to the 1820s, when an
Austrian inventor named Johann Friedrich Voigtländer marketed a rimless
monocle. The design as it is known today arose in the 1880s as a means
to alleviate the combined weight of metal frames with heavy glass
lenses. The style also came about from a desire to make eyewear as
inconspicuous as possible; at the time, eyeglasses were not considered
an acceptable fashion statement and carried connotations of one being
elderly or a member of the clergy; historically, most eyeglass wearers
needed them to correct presbyopia, and only clergymen tended to be
literate enough to require reading glasses.

### 1800s – 1920s

President Theodore Roosevelt in rimless pince-nez. Photos of Roosevelt
wearing the glasses led to the initial popularization of rimless
eyeglasses amongst Americans in the early 1900s. Rimless glasses were
first widely offered as pince-nez, with manufacturers arguing that the
design was superior to extant eyeglasses because it secured the lenses
directly to the nose and kept them in place. The style became
popularized in the years prior to World War I by Theodore Roosevelt,
whose popularity with the American people and public image as a
frontiersman helped to eliminate some of the stigma associated with
eyeglasses.

During this same period, another style became available in which the
lenses were mounted to two arms as well as a bridge; the style became
known as *three-piece glasses* for the three separate structural
components. The most popular three-piece style was known as a *riding
temple,* and was modeled after a style of eyeglasses favored by those
who relied on horses for transportation. The style lacked nosepads, and
featured small, oval lenses designed to sit flush with the face by way
of the combined efforts of curved temples that conformed to the back of
the wearer's ears and a curved nosepiece that conformed to the bridge of
the nose. The design eliminated any obstruction of vision caused by
eyeglass frames and also kept the glasses secure on the wearer's head.

### 1920s – 1960s

As more optometrists began to diagnose astigmatism, the pince nez became
less practical because of subtle shifts in the position of the lenses
caused by the wearer moving his or her head. With the implementation of
nosepads in 1920, the three-piece style surpassed the pince nez in
popularity; the new design allowed wearers to adjust the position of
glasses on the face, and also permitted for a wide variety of lens
shapes, with optometrists offering over 300 options by 1940 (though
variations on circles, ovals, and octagons remained most popular).

Also in the 1920s, a new style appeared in which an "arch" connected the
bridge to the temples, to provide extra stability for the lenses; the
mounting technique was referred to as "Shurset" ("sure set"). Although
the design would be considered a variant of "semi-rimless" glasses in
the latter part of the 20th century, the style was considered rimless
upon its inception because no part of the lens was secured inside of a
frame; modern semi-rimless eyewear features lenses partially secured
inside of a half-frame, with the lower portion of the lens held in place
by nylon wire. Though traditionally called "Rimways," this variation was
also referred to as Cortland style. A variation utilizing only two
screws and which only secured the lenses to the bridge was called the
Numont or the Two Screw Cortland; the removal of the temporal screws was
considered to be a cosmetic improvement.

During the 1940s, the United States Army adopted the numont as a style
available to soldiers requiring eyewear. Although rounded, wire-rimmed
frames were the most popular choice, some participants in World War II
wore numonts.

Three-piece glasses with temples and nosepads remained popular from the
1920s until the end of the 1950s; during the same period, Rimway glasses
began to edge them out in popularity, and once three-piece glasses had
fallen out of favor, remained in style into the 1960s.

### 1980s

Rimless glasses became popular again in the latter part of the 20th
century, particularly a brief renaissance in the 1980s. In the 1980s,
Rimways were often featured in movies to indicate that a character was
an intellectual; Wilford Brimley wore a pair as scientist Blair in *The
Thing*, as did Corey Feldman while playing a child inventor in *Friday
the 13th: The Final Chapter*. Paul Verhoeven chose a pair for Kurtwood
Smith to wear as villain Clarence Boddicker in *RoboCop* specifically
because the glasses' intellectual associations would clash with the
character's violent personality, a contradiction that he believed
recalled the similarly bespectacled Heinrich Himmler.

### 2000s – 2010s

Three-piece glasses rose in popularity in the early 21st century with
the implementation of lightweight titanium frames, which, coupled with
polycarbonate lenses, made the glasses virtually weightless on the
wearer's face. The favoring of rimless glasses by a variety of public
figures also served to increase their popularity; in 2008, demand rose
for rimless titanium glasses similar to those worn by Sarah Palin during
public appearances during the 2008 United States Presidential Election.
In 2011, the waning popularity of rimless glasses—which were being
supplanted by horn-rimmed glasses—was invigorated following the death of
Steve Jobs, whose round, rimless frames had become an iconic part of his
appearance. In the weeks following Jobs' death, Robert Marc, the
manufacturer who had designed Jobs' glasses in 1998, were inundated with
requests for identical frames, to the point that the company had to
place consumers on a three-month waiting list. Similarly, trade shows
throughout the world—especially in Asia—quickly sold out as consumer
demand rose for glasses like Jobs'.
[Category:Facewear](/Category:Facewear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")