---
title: Shutter shades
permalink: /Shutter_shades/
---

**Shutter shades**, also known as **slatted shades**, **louvered
shades**, or **Venetian blind shades** are sunglasses that, instead of
having darkened lenses, have horizontal slats similar to window
shutters, which are an integral part of the frame.

The shades are marketed as suitable for both men and women and are
available in an assortment of styles and colors. Depending on the
design, shutter shades may not function as sunglasses; although some
models contain UV resistant lenses, many do not. The horizontal plastic
"shades," neither provide protection for the eye from UV light nor
prevent a substantial amount of light from entering the eye.

## History

The first louvered sunglasses date from the 1950s.

A modernized version was released in the early 1980s. Sometime referred
to as "Venetian blinders", examples were featured in the music videos
for "Glittering Prize" by Simple Minds in 1982 and "Obsession" by
Animotion in 1984. They were also popularized by professional wrestler
Macho Man Randy Savage, which he wore before many of his matches, as
well as in his promos. Alain Mikli made a contemporary custom design for
Kanye West, again influenced by the fashion of the 1980s. West
popularized Mikli's design in the music video for "Stronger."

In 2007, Shutter Shades, Inc. released a design, which they also
patented. and trademarked the term "Shutter Shades" with the USPTO.
However, in 2015 a court in New York ruled that "shutter shades" had
become a generic term at least since 2009.
[Category:Facewear](/Category:Facewear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")