---
title: Sunglasses
permalink: /Sunglasses/
---

**Sunglasses** or **sun glasses** (informally called **shades**) are a
form of protective eyewear designed primarily to prevent bright sunlight
and high-energy visible light from damaging or discomforting the eyes.
They can sometimes also function as a visual aid, as variously termed
spectacles or glasses exist, featuring lenses that are colored,
polarized or darkened. In the early 20th century, they were also known
as **sun cheaters** (**cheaters** then being an American slang term for
glasses).

The American Optometric Association recommends wearing sunglasses that
block ultraviolet radiation (UV) whenever a person is in the sunlight to
protect the eyes from UV and blue light, which can cause several serious
eye problems. Its usage is mandatory immediately after some surgical
procedures, such as LASIK, and recommended for a certain time period in
dusty areas, when leaving the house and in front of a TV screen or
computer monitor after LASEK. It is important to note that dark glasses
that do not block UV radiation can be more damaging to the eyes than not
wearing eye protection at all, since they tend to open the pupil and
allow more UV rays into the eye. Since the 1940s, sunglasses have been a
popular fashion accessory, especially on the beach.

## Types

The following types are not all mutually exclusive; glasses may be in
Aviator style with mirrored lenses, for example.

### Aviator

Main article: Aviator sunglasses Aviator sunglasses Aviator sunglasses
feature oversize teardrop-shaped lenses and a thin metal frame. The
design was introduced in 1936 by Bausch & Lomb for issue to U.S.
military aviators. As a fashion statement, *aviator* sunglasses are
often made in mirrored, colored, and wrap-around styles.

The model first gained popularity in the 1940s when Douglas MacArthur
was seen sporting a pair at the Pacific Theatre. However, it was in the
late 1960s when the frames became widely used with the rise of the
hippie counterculture, which preferred large metallic sunglasses. The
brand became an icon of the 1970s, worn by Paul McCartney and Freddie
Mercury among others, and was also used as prescription eyeglasses.
Aviators' association with disco culture led to a decline in their
popularity by 1980. The model saw more limited use throughout the 1980s
and 1990s, aided by a 1982 product placement deal, featured most notably
in *Top Gun* and *Cobra*, with both films causing a 40% rise in 1986.
Aviators became popular again around 2000, as the hippie movement
experienced a brief revival, and was prominently featured in the MTV
show *Jackass*.

### Browline

Main article: Browline glasses

Based on the eyeglass design of the same name, browline glasses have
hard plastic or horn-rimmed arms and upper portions joined to a wire
lower frame. A traditional, conservative style based on mid-20th century
design, browlines were adapted into sunglasses form in the 1980s and
rapidly became one of the most popular styles; it has ebbed and sprung
in popularity in the decades that have followed.

### Oversized

Oversized sunglasses Ã  la Jackie O Oversized sunglasses, which were
fashionable in the 1980s, are now often used for humorous purposes. They
usually come in bright colors with colored lenses and can be purchased
cheaply.

\[\[<File:Woman> wearing sunglasses in Hong Kong,
1979.jpgthumb\|upright\|Frames made in the '70s were oversized.

The singer Elton John sometimes wore oversized sunglasses on stage in
the mid-1970s as part of his Captain Fantastic act.

Since the late 2000s, moderately oversized sunglasses have become a
fashion trend. There are many variations, such as the "Onassis",
discussed below, and Dior white sunglasses.

Onassis glasses or "Jackie O's" are very large sunglasses worn by women.
This style of sunglasses is said to mimic the kind most famously worn by
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis in the 1960s. The glasses continue to be
popular with women, and celebrities may use them, ostensibly to hide
from paparazzi.

Oversized sunglasses, because of their larger frames and lenses, are
useful for individuals who are trying to minimize the apparent size or
arch of their nose. Oversized sunglasses also offer more protection from
sunburn due to the larger areas of skin they cover, although sunblock
should still be used.

### Shutter shades

Main article: Shutter shades

Shutter shades were invented in the late 1940s, became a fad in the
early 1980s and have experienced a revival in the early-to-mid 2010s.
Instead of tinted lenses, they decrease sun exposure by means of a set
of parallel, horizontal shutters (like a small window shutter).
Analogous to Inuit goggles (see above), the principle is not to filter
light, but to decrease the amount of sun rays falling into the wearer's
eyes. To provide UV protection, shutter shades sometimes use lenses in
addition to the shutters; if not, they provide very insufficient
protection against ultraviolet radiation and blue light.

### Teashades

Teashade sunglasses "Teashades" (sometimes also called "John Lennon
glasses", "Round Metal", or, occasionally, "Granny Glasses") were a type
of psychedelic art wire-rim sunglasses that were often worn, usually for
purely aesthetic reasons, by members of the 1960s counterculture. Pop
icons such as Mick Jagger, Roger Daltrey, John Lennon, Jerry Garcia, Boy
George, Liam Gallagher, Suggs, Ozzy Osbourne, Duckie (Jon Cryer) in
*Pretty in Pink* and Jodie Foster's character in the film *Taxi Driver*
all wore teashades. The original teashade design was made up of
medium-sized, perfectly round lenses, supported by pads on the bridge of
the nose and a thin wire frame. When teashades became popular in the
late 1960s, they were often elaborated: Lenses were elaborately colored,
mirrored, and produced in excessively large sizes, and with the wire
earpieces exaggerated. A uniquely colored or darkened glass lens was
usually preferred. Modern versions tend to have plastic lenses, as do
many other sunglasses. Teashades are hard to find in shops today;
however, they can still be found at many costume Web sites and in some
countries.

The term has now fallen into disuse, although references can still be
found in literature of the time. "Teashades" was also used to describe
glasses worn to hide the effects of recreational drugs such as marijuana
(conjunctival injection) or heroin (pupillary constriction) or just
bloodshot eyes.

### Wayfarer

Main article: Ray-Ban Wayfarer Original *Ray-Ban Wayfarer* The Ray-Ban
Wayfarer is a (mostly) plastic-framed design for sunglasses produced by
the Ray-Ban company. Introduced in 1952, the trapezoidal lenses are
wider at the top than the bottom (inspired by the Browline eyeglasses
popular at the time), and were famously worn by James Dean, Roy Orbison,
Elvis Presley, Bob Marley, The Beatles and other actors and singers. The
original frames were black; frames in many different colors were later
introduced. There is often a silver piece on the corners as well. Since
the early 1980s, makers have also developed variants of the model, most
notably the Clubmaster model, introduced in 1982, essentially Browlines
made of plastic.

These were mostly popular in the late 1950s and during the 1960s (being
linked to the rock-and-roll/blues and Mod cultures), before plastic
glasses were displaced by metallic rims popular among the
counter-culture. In the late 1970s, the rise of New wave music, New
Romanticism and the popularity of The Blues Brothers aside from 50s and
1960s nostalgia and the anti-disco backlash later on brought the model
out of near-retirement, becoming the most sold model between 1980 and
1999 aided by a lucrative 1982 product placement deal, which put it on
many movies and TV shows such as *The Breakfast Club* and
*Moonlighting*. 1980s nostalgia and the influence of the hipster
subculture and the television series *Mad Men* boosted Wayfarers once
again after a slump in the 1990s and 2000s, also aided by a 2000
redesign (New Wayfarer), surpassing Aviators since 2012.

### Wrap-around

Mirrored wrap-around sunglasses Wrap-arounds are a style of sunglasses
characterized by being strongly curved, to wrap around the face. They
may have a single curved semi-circular lens that covers both eyes and
much of the same area of the face covered by protective goggles, usually
with a minimal plastic frame and single piece of plastic serving as a
nosepiece. Glasses described as wraparound may alternatively have two
lenses, but again with a strongly curved frame.

These were first made in the 1960s as variants of the Aviator model,
used by Yoko Ono and Clint Eastwood in the *Dirty Harry* films. The
modern variant surged in the mid-1980s, heavily based on the
then-popular Wayfarer, but adapting it to a more futuristic look. As a
backlash against 80s fashion occurred in the 1990s, wraparounds became
one of the favorite frames of the decade.

## Variants

### Clip-on

Clip-on sunglasses Clip-on glasses are a form of tinted glasses that can
be clipped on to eyeglasses for protection from the Sun. An alternative
are flip-up glasses.

### Gradient lenses

Glasses with gradient lenses Gradient lenses go from a darker shade at
the top to a lighter one at the bottom, so there will be more protection
from sunlight the higher one looks through the lens, but the lower one
looks through the lens, the less protection is offered. An advantage is
that one can wear them indoors without fear of tripping over something
and also allowing the user to see. Wearing sunglasses to nightclubs has
become common in recent times, where the gradient lens comes in handy.
Gradient lenses may also be advantageous for activities such as flying
airplanes and driving automobiles, as they allow the operator a clear
view of the instrument panel, low in his line of sight and usually
hidden in shadow, while still reducing glare from the view out the
windscreen. The Independent (London), has also referred to these style
of sunglasses as the Murphy Lens.

Double gradient lenses are dark at the top, light in the middle and dark
at the bottom.

Gradients should not be confused with bifocals and progressive lenses.

### Flip-up

Flip-up sunglasses add the benefits of sunglasses to corrective
eyeglasses, allowing the wearer to flip up the tinted lenses for indoor
use. An alternative are clip-on glasses.

### Mirrored

Main article: Mirrored sunglasses Mirrored aviators Mirrored lenses have
a metallic, partially reflective coating on the outer surface combined
with a tinted glass lens. Mirrored lenses of different colors can expand
the range of fashion styles.
[Category:Facewear](/Category:Facewear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")