---
title: Wayfarer
permalink: /Wayfarer/
---

**Ray-Ban Wayfarer** sunglasses have been manufactured by Ray-Ban since
1956, which in turn has belonged to the Italian Luxottica Group since
1999. Wayfarers enjoyed early popularity in the 1950s and 1960s,
returning to popularity again after a 1982 product placement. A second
revival occurred in the mid-2000s.



## Design

Wayfarers were designed in 1952 by American optical designer Raymond
Stegeman, who worked for Bausch & Lomb, Ray-Ban's parent company at that
time. The design was inspired by, "a mid-century classic to rival Eames
chairs and Cadillac tail fins." According to design critic Stephen
Bayley, the "distinctive trapezoidal frame spoke a non-verbal language
that hinted at unstable dangerousness, but one nicely tempered by the
sturdy arms which, according to the advertising, gave the frames a
'masculine look'." The sunglasses also featured a new plastic molding
technology.

## 1970s and 1980s

Actor Corey Feldman wearing Wayfarers at the Academy Awards, 1989 After
Wayfarers' heyday in the 1950s and 1960s, sales declined. Though
Wayfarers' cultural popularity was aided in 1980 by the film *The Blues
Brothers*, only 18,000 pairs were sold in 1981, and Wayfarers were on
the verge of discontinuation. In 1982 Ray-Ban signed a $50,000-a-year
deal with Unique Product Placement of Burbank, California, to place
Ray-Bans in movies and television shows. Between 1982 and 1987, Ray-Ban
sunglasses appeared in over 60 movies and television shows per year, an
effort continued through 2007. Tom Cruise's wearing of Wayfarers in the
1983 movie *Risky Business* was one of the key placements, and that year
360,000 pairs were sold. Additional appearances in movies like *The
Breakfast Club*, and series like *Miami Vice* and *Moonlighting*, led
sales to 1.5 million annually.

Wayfarers were also worn by various musicians, including Roy Orbison,
Michael Jackson, George Michael, Billy Joel, Johnny Marr, Blondie's
Debbie Harry, Madonna, Depeche Mode, Elvis Costello, and members of U2
and Queen, as well as public figures such as Max Headroom, Jack
Nicholson, and Anna Wintour.

Bret Easton Ellis' fiction contained references to Wayfarers. Lyrics
that mentioned the style of glasses included Don Henley's 1984 song "The
Boys Of Summer", which contained the lyric "You got that hair slicked
back and those Wayfarers on, baby". Corey Hart's music video Sunglasses
at Night shows the artists wearing Wayfarers in darkness. In response to
these placements, Ray-Ban's Wayfarer expanded from two models in 1981 to
about 40 models by 1989.

## 1990s

Ray-Ban New Wayfarer sunglasses *(RB2132 901L)* As the 1990s began, the
frames again became unpopular. The 1950s revival that fueled the
glasses' popularity in the 1980s lost momentum, and Wayfarers were
outcompeted by wraparound frames. During the slump of the 1990s,
Ray-Ban's parent company, Bausch & Lomb was facing pressure from
competitors like Oakley. In 1999, Bausch & Lomb sold Ray-Ban to
Luxottica Group S.p.A. of Italy for $640 million. In 2001, the Wayfarer
underwent a significant redesign (RB2132), with the frames made smaller
and less angular, and changed from acetate to a lighter injected
plastic. The changes were intended to update the frames' style during a
period of unpopularity and to make them easier to wear (the frames'
previous tilt made them impossible to perch on top of one's head, for
instance).

## 2000s

Wayfarers were brought back into fashion in the late 2000s when public
figures including ChloÃ« Sevigny and Mary-Kate Olsen began wearing
vintage frames. When Ray-Ban noticed that vintage Wayfarers were selling
for significant prices on eBay, a 2007 re-introduction of the original
Wayfarer (RB2140) design was initiated. The RB2140 model is identical to
the original B&L5022 model, except the metal "studs" on the temple arms
were replaced with the Ray-Ban logo and the right lens now bears the
logo as well. (As of 2007, Wayfarers were available in Original
Wayfarer, New Wayfarer, and Wayfarer Folding styles.) Ray-Ban's
marketing strategy was threefold: a return to the sunglasses' original,
rebellious design, an "edgy" advertising campaign and "high-profile PR
events", and the use of new media like MySpace to connect with
consumers. Sales in 2007 were 231% greater than in 2006 at Selfridge's
London; as of October 2007, the Wayfarer was the Luxottica Group's
third-best-selling style.

## Similar designs

John F. Kennedy wearing American Optical Saratoga sunglasses which
resemble Wayfarers while on vacation at the Kennedy Compound in Hyannis
Port, Massachusetts, August 1963 The sunglasses worn by Audrey Hepburn
in *Breakfast at Tiffany's*, although often identified as Wayfarers, are
actually "Manhattan" by Oliver Goldsmith.

During the 2000s Wayfarer revival, many sunglasses designs inspired by
the original Wayfarers were produced by designers unaffiliated with
Ray-Ban. Grey Ant's Grant Krajecki designed a larger, cartoonish version
of the glasses "so extreme that are best worn by those with a good sense
of humor". Other Wayfarer-inspired sunglasses included Oliver Peoples'
Hollis, REM Eyewear's Converse, and various designs in Juicy Couture,
Hugo Boss, Kate Spade, Marc Jacobs's and Kaenon Polarized 2008 lines.
Between July and September 2008, retailers began selling frameless
Wayfarers. [Category:Facewear](/Category:Facewear "wikilink")
[Category:Eyewear](/Category:Eyewear "wikilink")