---
title: Stock tie
permalink: /Stock_tie/
---

[left\|thumb\|A woman in an equestrian riding habit with a stock tie
around her
neck](/File:Waldmüller_-_Porträt_einer_Frau_als_Amazone,_mit_ihren_Windhund.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb\|[Thomas Jefferson](Thomas_Jefferson "wikilink") portrait,
wearing a stock tie](/File:Thomas_Jefferson_rev.jpg "wikilink")

A **stock tie**, or **stock**, is a tie worn around the neck of
[equestrians](/equestrianism "wikilink") dressed formally for a
[hunt](/fox_hunting "wikilink") or certain competitive events. Most
equestrian competition rules require it to be white. It is mandated
attire for use in [dressage](/dressage "wikilink") and the dressage
phase of [eventing](/eventing "wikilink"). Use of the stock tie also is
seen in [show jumping](/show_jumping "wikilink") and [fox
hunting](/fox_hunting "wikilink"). The stock tie never has gone out of
fashion for equestrians.

## History

Traditionally, the stock tie is used in the [hunt
field](/fox_hunting "wikilink") as a safety measure: in case of injury,
the tie may be used as a temporary bandage for a horse's leg or a sling
for a rider's arm. It also is useful in keeping rain or wind out of the
rider's collar. Stock ties often are worn by riders along with a
[shadbelly](/shadbelly "wikilink").

The stock tie was worn by gentlemen as everyday apparel in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. It became more of a formal tie in
the later nineteenth century. These old stock ties often were black or
white. They were made of gauze, fine cotton, or silk. Sometimes the
stock tie was starched or otherwise reinforced to be stiff around the
neck: with the chin forced up, presuming that the wearer would look more
important and formal.

Some stock ties buckled or hooked up the back and sometimes, had bows or
ruffles attached to the front.

[thumb\|right\|A contemporary stock pin](/Image:Stockpin.jpg "wikilink")
Today it is worn with a pin (usually plain and gold, although more
elaborate pins also are seen). The pin is stuck through the knot or just
below the knot and derives its name from the tie, being called a "stock
pin".

## See also

[Stock (military)](/Stock_(military) "wikilink"), a leather collar worn
by soldiers during the 18th century

[Category:Rider apparel](/Category:Rider_apparel "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](/Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Neckties](/Category:Neckties "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](/Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Victorian
fashion](/Category:Victorian_fashion "wikilink")