---
title: Glove
permalink: /Glove/
---

A **glove** (Middle English from Old English *glof*) is a garment
covering the whole hand. Gloves usually have separate sheaths or
openings for each finger and the thumb.

If there is an opening but no (or a short) covering sheath for each
finger they are called **fingerless gloves**. Fingerless gloves having
one large opening rather than individual openings for each finger are
sometimes called gauntlets, though gauntlets are not necessarily
fingerless.

Gloves which cover the entire hand or fist but do not have separate
finger openings or sheaths are called **mittens**. Mittens are warmer
than other styles of gloves made of the same material because fingers
maintain their warmth better when they are in contact with each other;
reduced surface area reduces heat loss.

A hybrid of glove and mitten contains open-ended sheaths for the four
fingers (as in a fingerless glove, but not the thumb) and an additional
compartment encapsulating the four fingers. This compartment can be
lifted off the fingers and folded back to allow the individual fingers
ease of movement and access while the hand remains covered. The usual
design is for the mitten cavity to be stitched onto the back of the
fingerless glove only, allowing it to be flipped over (normally held
back by Velcro or a button) to transform the garment from a mitten to a
glove. These hybrids are called convertible mittens or glittens, a
combination of "glove" and "mittens".

Gloves protect and comfort hands against cold or heat, damage by
friction, abrasion or chemicals, and disease; or in turn to provide a
guard for what a bare hand should not touch. Latex, nitrile rubber or
vinyl disposable gloves are often worn by health care professionals as
hygiene and contamination protection measures. Police officers often
wear them to work in crime scenes to prevent destroying evidence in the
scene. Many criminals wear gloves to avoid leaving fingerprints, which
makes the crime investigation more difficult. However, the gloves
themselves can leave prints that are just as unique as human
fingerprints. After collecting glove prints, law enforcement can then
match them to gloves that they have collected as evidence. In many
jurisdictions the act of wearing gloves itself while committing a crime
can be prosecuted as an inchoate offense.

Fingerless gloves are useful where dexterity is required that gloves
would restrict. Cigarette smokers and church organists often use
fingerless gloves. Some gloves include a gauntlet that extends partway
up the arm. Cycling gloves for road racing or touring are usually
fingerless. Guitar players often use fingerless gloves in circumstances
where it is too cold to play with an uncovered hand.

Gloves are made of materials including cloth, knitted or felted wool,
leather, rubber, latex, neoprene, silk, and metal (as in mail). Gloves
of kevlar protect the wearer from cuts. Gloves and gauntlets are
integral components of pressure suits and spacesuits such as the
Apollo/Skylab A7L which went to the moon. Spacesuit gloves combine
toughness and environmental protection with a degree of sensitivity and
flexibility.

### Fashion\`

Western lady's gloves for formal and semi-formal wear come in three
lengths: wrist ("matinee"), elbow, and opera or full-length (over the
elbow, reaching to the biceps). Satin and stretch satin are popular and
mass-produced. Some women wear gloves as part of "dressy" outfits, such
as for church and weddings. Long white gloves are common accessories for
teenage girls attending formal events such as prom, quincea√±era,
cotillion, or formal ceremonies at church, such as confirmation.

In Japan, white gloves are worn frequently. Work-oriented white gloves
are worn for activities such as gardening and cleanup; "dress" white
gloves are worn by professionals who want a clean public appearance,
such as taxi drivers, police, politicians and elevator operators.
However white gloves are not recommended for touching old books and
similar antiquities.

## Fingerless gloves

Fingerless gloves or "glovelettes" are garments worn on the hands which
resemble regular gloves in most ways, except that the finger columns are
half-length and opened, allowing the top-half of the wearer's fingers to
be shown.

Fingerless gloves are often padded in the palm area, to provide
protection to the hand, and the exposed fingers do not interfere with
sensation or gripping. In contrast to traditional full gloves, often
worn for warmth, fingerless gloves will often have a ventilated back to
allow the hands to cool; this is commonly seen in weightlifting gloves.

Fingerless gloves are worn by motorcyclists to better grip the
handlebars, as well as by skateboarders and rollerbladers, to protect
the palms of the hands and add grip in the event of a fall. Some
anglers, particularly fly fishermen, favour fingerless gloves to allow
manipulation of line and tackle in cooler conditions. Fingerless gloves
are common among marching band members, particularly those who play the
clarinet or open-hole flute, due to the difficulty of covering small
holes whilst wearing gloves. The lack of fabric on the fingertips allows
for better use of touchscreens, as on smartphones and tablet computers.
Professional MMA fighters are required to wear fingerless gloves in
fights.

## Leather gloves

Lined black leather gloves with red leather fourchettes A **leather
glove** is a fitted covering for the hand with a separate sheath for
each finger and the thumb. This covering is composed of the tanned hide
of an animal (with the hair removed), though in recent years it is more
common for the leather to be synthetic.

### Common uses

Leather gloves have been worn by people for thousands of years. The
unique properties of leather allow for both a comfortable fit and useful
grip for the wearer. The grain present on the leather and the pores
present in the leather gives the gloves the unique ability to assist the
wearer as they grip an object. As soft as a leather glove may be, its
pores and grain provide a level of friction when "gripped" against an
item or surface.

A common use for leather gloves is sporting events. In baseball, a
baseball glove is an oversized leather glove with a web used for
fielding the ball. Leather gloves are also used in handball, cycling,
and American football.

Early Formula One racing drivers used steering wheels taken directly
from road cars. They were normally made from wood, necessitating the use
of driving gloves.

Leather gloves provide protection from occupational hazards. For
example, beekeepers use leather gloves to avoid being stung by bees.
Construction workers might use leather gloves for added grip and for
protecting their hands. Welders use gloves too for protection against
electrical shocks, extreme heat, ultraviolet and infrared.

Criminals have been known to wear leather gloves during the commission
of crimes. Gloves are worn by criminals because the tactile properties
of the leather allow for good grip and dexterity. These properties are
the result of a grain present on the surface of the leather. The grain
makes the surface of the leather unique to each glove. Investigators are
able to dust for the glove prints left behind from the leather the same
way in which they dust for fingerprints.

### Leather dress gloves

#### Main types of gloving leather

Leather is a natural product with special characteristics that make it
comfortable to wear, and give it great strength and flexibility. Because
it is a natural product, with its own unique variations, every piece has
its own individual characteristics. As they are worn and used, leather
gloves (especially if they fit snugly) will conform to the wearer's
hand. As this occurs the leather of the glove will become more
malleable, and thus softer and more supple. This process is known as
'breaking-in' the glove. Overtime wear spots may appear on certain parts
of the palm and fingertips, due to the constant use of those areas of
the glove. Creases and wrinkles will appear on the palm side of the
leather glove and will generally correspond to the locations of the
hinge joints of the wearer's hands, including the interphalangeal
articulations of hand, metacarpophalangeal joints, intercarpal
articulations, and wrists.

Because the leather is natural as well as delicate, the wearer must take
precaution as to not damage them. The constant handling of damp or wet
surfaces will discolor lighter-colored gloves and stiffen the leather of
any glove. The wearer will often unknowingly damage or stain their
gloves while doing such tasks as twisting a wet door knob or wiping a
running nose with a gloved hand.

Leather dress gloves that are worn very tight and possess very short,
elasticized wrists, are most often referred to as *cop gloves* or *law
enforcement gloves* because of their prevalence as issued duty gloves
for many law enforcement agencies. It is common attire in leather
subculture and BDSM communities.

-   Lambskin is widely used for fashion gloves and it is casual and
    country gloves. It is the most used material for gloves made in
    Europe in the known as French style..
-   Cowhide is often used for lower-priced gloves. This leather is
    generally considered too thick and bulky for the majority of glove
    styles, particularly finer dress gloves. It is, however, used for
    some casual styles of glove.
-   Deerskin has the benefit of great strength and elasticity, but has a
    more rugged appearance, with more grain on the surface, than
    "hairsheep". It is very hard-wearing and heavier in weight.
-   Goatskin is occasionally used for gloves. It is hard-wearing but
    coarser than other leathers and is normally used for cheaper gloves.
-   Hairsheep originates from sheep that grow hair, not wool. Hairsheep
    leather is finer and less bulky than other leathers. Its major
    benefits are softness of touch, suppleness, strength, and lasting
    comfort. It is very durable and is particularly suited for the
    manufacture of dress gloves.
-   Peccary is the world‚Äôs rarest and most luxurious gloving leather.
    Peccary leather is very soft, difficult to sew, and hard-wearing.
-   Sheepskin, also called shearling, is widely used for casual and
    country gloves. It is very warm in cold weather, and as a leather
    reversed, it has still attached wool on the inside.
-   Slink lamb is used only in the most expensive lambskin gloves. Some
    of the finest lambskin comes from New Zealand.

### Leather glove linings

-   Cashmere is warm, light in weight, and very comfortable to wear.
    Cashmere yarn comes from the hair of mountain goats, whose fleece
    allows them to survive the extreme weather conditions they are
    exposed to.
-   Silk is warm in winter and cool in summer and is used both in men's
    and women's gloves, but is more popular in women's.
-   Wool is well known for its natural warmth and comfort, as well as
    having a natural elasticity.
-   Other linings, which include wool mixtures and acrylics.

#### Component parts

The component parts that may be found in a leather dress glove are one
pair of tranks, one pair of thumbs, four whole fourchettes, four half
fourchettes, two gussets, and six quirks. Depending on the style of the
glove there may also be roller pieces, straps, rollers, eyelets, studs,
sockets and domes. Finally, linings will themselves consist of tranks,
thumbs and fourchettes.

#### Stitching

The most popular types of leather glove sewing stitches used today are:

-   Hand stitched, which is most popular in men's gloves and some
    women's styles. Hand stitching is a very time-consuming and skilled
    process.
-   Inseam, which is mainly used on women's gloves, but occasionally on
    men's dress gloves.

#### Some glove terms

-   *Button length* is the measurement in inches that is used to
    determine the length/measurement from the base of the glove thumb to
    the cuff of the glove.
-   *Fourchettes* are the inside panels on the fingers of some glove
    styles.
-   *Perforations* are small holes that are punched in the leather. They
    are often added for better ventilation, grip, or aesthetics and can
    be as fine as a pin hole.
-   *Points* are the three, or sometimes single, line of decorative
    stitching on the back of the glove.
-   *Quirks* are found on only the most expensive hand sewn gloves. They
    are small diamond shaped pieces of leather sewn at the base of the
    fingers, where they are attached to the hand of the glove to improve
    the fit.
-   A *strap and roller* is used to adjust the closeness of the fit
    around the wrist.
-   A *Vent* is the 'V' shaped cut out of the glove, sometimes at the
    back, but more often on the palm, to give the glove an easier fit
    around the wrist.

### Driving gloves

Rick Mastracchio's damaged glove during STS-118 **Driving gloves** are
designed for holding a steering wheel and transmitting the feeling of
the road to the driver. They provide a good feel and protect the hands.
They are designed to be worn tight and to not interfere with hand
movements. The increased grip allows for more control and increased
safety at speed.

True driver‚Äôs gloves offer tactile advantages to drivers frequently
handling a car near the limits of adhesion. Made of soft leather,
drivers gloves are unlined with external seams.

Further information: Driving glove

## Mittens

"Mitten" redirects here. For other uses, see Mitten (disambiguation).
Saami mittens Gloves which cover the entire hand but do not have
separate finger openings or sheaths are called **mittens**. Generally,
mittens still separate the thumb from the other four fingers. They have
different colours and designs. Mittens have a higher thermal efficiency
than gloves as they have a smaller surface area exposed to the cold.

The earliest mittens known to archeologists date to around 1000 A.D. in
Latvia. Mittens continue to be part of Latvian national costume today.
Wool biodegrades quickly, so it is likely that earlier mittens, possibly
in other countries, may have existed but were not preserved. An
exception is the specimen found during the excavations of the Early
Medieval trading town of Dorestad in the Netherlands. In the harbour
area a mitten of wool was discovered dating from the 8th or early 9th
century.

Many people around the Arctic Circle have used mittens, including other
Baltic peoples, Native Americans and Vikings. Mittens are a common sight
on ski slopes, as they not only provide extra warmth but extra
protection from injury.

**Idiot mittens** are two mittens connected by a length of yarn, string
or lace, threaded through the sleeves of a coat. This arrangement is
typically provided for small children to prevent the mittens becoming
discarded and lost; when removed, the mittens simply dangle from the
string just beyond the cuff of the sleeve. Hybrid glove / mitten
**Gunner's Mittens** ‚Äì In the 1930s, special fingerless mittens were
introduced that have a flap located in the palm of the mitten so a
hunter or soldier could have his finger free to fire his weapon.
Originally developed for hunters in the frigid zones of the US and
Canada, eventually most military organizations copied them.

**Scratch mitts** do not separate the thumb, and are designed to prevent
babies ‚Äì who do not yet have fine motor control ‚Äì from scratching their
faces. [Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")