---
title: Birkenstock
permalink: /Birkenstock/
---

[thumb\|Pairs of Birkenstocks (original in the back, *Birki's* in the
front).](/Image:Birki's_sandals.JPG "wikilink") [alt=Birkenstock Arizona
Mens Sandal\|thumb\|Birkenstock Arizona Mens
Sandal](/File:Birkenstock_(1).gif "wikilink") **Birkenstock Orthopädie
GmbH & Co. KG** is a [German](/Germany "wikilink")
[shoe](/shoe "wikilink") manufacturer headquartered in [Neustadt
(Wied)](/Neustadt_(Wied) "wikilink"), [Germany](/Germany "wikilink").
The company sells Birkenstocks, a German brand of
[sandals](/sandal_(footwear) "wikilink"), and other shoes notable for
their contoured [cork](/Cork_(material) "wikilink") and
[rubber](/rubber "wikilink") footbeds (soles), which conform somewhat to
the shape of their wearers' feet.

Representative products include the two-strap *Arizona sandal* and the
*Boston clog*.

## History

The Birkenstock brand traces its roots to Johann Adam Birkenstock,
registered in 1774 as a "[vassal](/vassal "wikilink") and shoemaker" in
local church archives in the small Hessian village of Langen-Bergheim.
In 1896, Johann's great-great-grandson Konrad Birkenstock developed the
first contoured [insole](/insole "wikilink") for use by shoemakers in
the production of custom footwear.[1] Also in the year 1896 Karl opened
two shoe stores in Frankfurt, Germany where he continued to make and
sell his insoles.[2] 1902 saw the development of the first flexible
arch-support for insertion into factory-made shoes; and in 1964, Karl
Birkenstock developed these inserts into a shoe — thus producing the
original prototype of the Birkenstock sandal. In 1925 Konrad Birkenstock
expanded the company by buying a large factory in Friedberg, Hesse.
After World War II (1939–1945) the Birkenstock sandal was popular among
returning soldiers because of the orthopedic support.[3] Starting in
1963 and continuing into 1964 Karl Birkenstock released his first
athletic sandal with a flexible footbed called Madrid. It soon became
popular, especially among gymnasts.

In 1966, Birkenstocks were introduced in the United States, as well as
elsewhere. The American Margot Fraser "discovered" Birkenstock sandals
while visiting a spa in Germany.[4] She gained relief from a foot
condition, and founded a trading company called Birkenstock Footprint
Sandals, Inc., in [Novato, California](/Novato,_California "wikilink"),
based on her enthusiasm for the sandals. Renamed Birkenstock
Distribution USA, Inc., in 2005, the company remained until 2007 the
exclusive importer and distributor of Birkenstock name-brand products in
the United States. In 2007 the owners of Birkenstock Orthopädie GmbH &
Co. KG purchased their long-standing distribution partner Birkenstock
Distribution USA, Inc. (BDUSA).

When Margot Fraser first started distributing them in San Francisco,
California, she was unsuccessful. Later on in the 1970s a cultural
revolution improved her business. In the United States, Birkenstock
first became popular among young men and later on among [flower
children](/flower_child "wikilink"), a group traditionally associated
with [American liberalism](/American_liberalism "wikilink"). The shoe
became popular with [hippies](/hippies "wikilink") and others who had a
"back to nature" philosophy and appreciated the natural foot shape and
foot-friendly comfort of Birkenstocks.[5]

[Nordstrom](/Nordstrom "wikilink") became the first department store to
sell Birkenstock sandals in 1986. Prior to that, health food stores were
Birkenstock's primary outlet.

In the early 1990s "Birks" enjoyed a surge of popularity among
high-school and college-aged [Generation Xers](/Generation_X "wikilink")
comparable to the 2000s popularity of [Rainbow
Sandals](/Rainbow_Sandals "wikilink") and
[Crocs](/Crocs "wikilink").,[6] followed by another comeback among teens
and young adults in the early 2010s. During the 2004 U.S. presidential
primary, some conservatives derided [Howard
Dean](/Howard_Dean "wikilink")'s supporters as "Birkenstock
liberals".[7]

In 2018, the company was given
[PETA](/People_for_the_Ethical_Treatment_of_Animals "wikilink")'s Libby
Award for being the "Most Animal-Friendly Shoe Company."[8]

## Footbed

The footbed of the Birkenstock shoe was created in the 1930s and
possesses four different layers that complete the shoes. The first layer
of the shoe is the shock absorbent sole, followed by two layers of
[jute](/jute "wikilink") fibers, and a firm corked footbed. The last
layer is the footbed line which is a soft suede.[9]

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Companies established in
1774](/Category:Companies_established_in_1774 "wikilink")
[Category:Goods manufactured in
Germany](/Category:Goods_manufactured_in_Germany "wikilink")
[Category:German brands](/Category:German_brands "wikilink")
[Category:Sandals](/Category:Sandals "wikilink") [Category:Shoe
brands](/Category:Shoe_brands "wikilink") [Category:Shoe companies of
Germany](/Category:Shoe_companies_of_Germany "wikilink")

[1] [History of Birkenstock](http://birken.tw/?node=ENGHISTORY)

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] Carr, Collie (12 March 2006). ["Thank You for Insulting Our
Sandals"](https://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/12/fashion/sundaystyles/12birkenstock.html).
*[The New York Times](/The_New_York_Times "wikilink")*. Accessed 7 May
2012.

[6] Lydia DePillis (15 November 2013)["The rise and fall and rise and
fall of
Crocs"](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2013/11/15/the-rise-and-fall-and-rise-and-fall-of-crocs/).
*[Washington Post](/Washington_Post "wikilink")* Accessed 7 November
2015.

[7] Eric (31 August 2003). ["Who's Afraid of Howard
Dean?"](http://www.classicalvalues.com/archives/000349.html) *Classical
Values*. Accessed 7 May 2012.

[8] Barbara Schneider-Levy,"Birkenstock Is Voted Most Animal-Friendly
Shoe Company by PETA’s Youth Group,"
[FootwearNews.com](http://footwearnews.com/2018/focus/awards/birkenstock-vegan-friendly-shoe-company-2017-peta2-libby-award-497699/),
14 February 2018.

[9]