---
title: Brogue shoe
permalink: /Brogue_shoe/
---

[thumb\|right\|Men's full brogue Oxford dress
shoes](/File:Darkoakadelaidesside.jpg "wikilink") The **brogue**
(derived from the [Gaelic](/Goidelic_languages "wikilink") *bróg*
(Irish), *bròg* (Scottish) "shoe") is a style of low-heeled shoe or
[boot](/boot "wikilink") traditionally characterised by multiple-piece,
sturdy leather uppers with decorative
[perforations](/perforations "wikilink") (or "broguing") and serration
along the pieces' visible edges.

Brogues were traditionally considered to be outdoor or country footwear
not otherwise appropriate for casual or business occasions, but brogues
are now considered appropriate in most contexts. Brogues are most
commonly found in one of four toe cap styles (full or "wingtip", semi-,
quarter and longwing) and four closure styles
([Oxford](/Oxford_shoe "wikilink"), [Derby](/Derby_shoe "wikilink"),
[ghillie](/Ghillies_(dance) "wikilink"), and
[monk](/monk_shoe "wikilink")). Today, in addition to their typical form
of sturdy leather shoes or boots, brogues may also take the form of
business [dress shoes](/dress_shoe "wikilink"),
[sneakers](/sneakers_(footwear) "wikilink"), [high-heeled women's
shoes](/High_heels "wikilink"), or any other shoe form that utilises or
evokes the multi-piece construction and perforated, serrated piece edges
characteristic of brogues.

## History

Modern brogues trace their roots to a rudimentary shoe originating in
[Ireland](/Ireland "wikilink") and [Scotland](/Scotland "wikilink") that
was constructed using untanned hide. Modern brogues feature decorative
perforations. These are often said to stem from the original Irish
brogues as well, specifically from holes intended to allow water to
drain from the shoes when the wearer crossed wet terrain such as a
[bog](/bog "wikilink"). However, contemporary descriptions of the
original brogues do not mention such holes. The word "brogue" came into
English in the late sixteenth century. It comes from the
[Gaelic](/Goidelic_languages "wikilink") *bróg* (Irish), *bròg*
(Scottish) "shoe", from the Old Norse "brók" meaning "leg covering". The
Scots word *brogue* is also used to denote a bradawl or boring tool as
well as the action of piercing with such a tool.

The word "brogue" was first used to describe a form of outdoor, country
walking shoe in the early twentieth century traditionally worn by men.
At that time the brogue was not considered to be appropriate for other
occasions, social or business. Over time perceptions have changed and
brogues are now considered appropriate in most contexts, including
business. Brogues continue to be most common as leather dress and casual
shoes and boots, but can also be found in many other forms including
canvas and leather sneakers and high-heeled women's shoes.

## Styles

Brogues are most commonly found in one of four toe-cap styles (full or
"wingtip" brogues, semi-brogues, quarter brogues and longwing brogues)
and four closure styles (Oxford, Derby, ghillie and monk strap). Most
commonly offered as a leather dress shoe, brogues may also come in the
form of boots, canvas or leather sneakers or any other shoe type that
includes or evokes the multi-piece construction and perforated, serrated
edges characteristic of brogues.

### Toe caps

Brogue styles are determined by the shape of the toe cap and include the
commonly available full brogue (or "wingtip" in the United States),
semi-brogue and quarter brogue styles, and may also be found in the less
common longwing brogue style.

#### Full brogues (or wingtips)

[thumb\|left\|Men's full brogue (or wingtip) Oxford dress
shoe](/File:Fullbrogue_(Grenson).jpg "wikilink") [thumb\|right\|Men's
full brogue (or wingtip) Oxford spectator dress
shoes](/File:Oxford_full_brogue_spectator_shoes.jpg "wikilink") Full
brogues (also known as wingtips) are characterised by a pointed toe cap
with extensions (wings) that run along both sides of the toe,
terminating near the ball of the foot. Viewed from the top, this toe cap
style is "W" shaped and looks similar to a bird with extended wings,
explaining the style name "wingtips" that is commonly used in the United
States. The toe cap of a full brogue is both perforated and serrated
along its edges and includes additional decorative perforations in the
center of the toe cap. A shoe with a wingtip-style toecap but no
perforations is known as an "austerity brogue", while a plain-toe shoe
with wingtip-style perforations is a "blind brogue".

**[Spectator shoes](/Spectator_shoes "wikilink")** (British English:
**Co-respondent shoes**) are full brogue Oxfords constructed from two
contrasting colours, typically having the toe and heel cap and sometimes
the lace panels in a darker color than the main body of the shoe. Common
color combinations include a white shoe body with either black or tan
caps, but other colours can be used.

#### Ghillie brogues

[thumb\|left\|Men's full brogue ghillie
shoes](/File:Ghillie_Brogues.jpg "wikilink") The ghillie style of full
brogue has no tongue, to facilitate drying, and long laces that wrap
around the leg above the ankle and tie below the calf to facilitate
keeping the tie clear of mud. Despite the functional aspects of their
design, ghillie brogues are most commonly seen as a component of
traditional, formal Scottish dress and are worn primarily for social
occasions.

#### Semi-brogues (or half brogues)

[thumb\|right\|Toe cap detail of a man's semi-brogue (or half brogue)
dress shoe](/File:Rosette_(Broguing).jpg "wikilink") Semi-brogues (also
known as half brogues) are characterised by a toe cap with decorative
perforations and serration along the cap's edge and includes additional
decorative perforations in the center of the toe cap. The half brogue
was first designed and produced by [John Lobb
Ltd.](/John_Lobb "wikilink") as an Oxford in 1937 in an effort to offer
his customers a shoe more stylish than a plain oxford, yet not as bold
as a full brogue.

#### Quarter brogues

[thumb\|Men's quarter brogue Oxford dress
shoes](/File:Acorn_captoes_side.JPG "wikilink") Quarter brogues are
characterised by a cap toe with decorative perforations and serrations
along the cap's edge, however, unlike semi-brogues, quarter brogues have
no decorative perforations in the center of the toe cap. Quarter brogues
are more formal than semi brogues and full brogues; they are the most
formal of dress shoes with brogueing, making them the ideal fit to pair
with business attire (suits).

#### Longwing brogues

Longwing brogues (also known in the US as "English" brogues, and in the
UK as "American" brogues) are Derby style shoes characterised by a
pointed toe cap with wings that extend the full length of the shoe,
meeting at a center seam at the heel. Longwing Derby brogues were most
popular in the US during the 1970s, and although the popularity of this
style has decreased, it remains available.

### Closures

Closure style is not a defining characteristic of the brogue and
therefore brogues can be found in a variety of closure styles. Brogues
are commonly available in laced Oxford, Derby or ghillie styles, but can
also be found as buckle and monk strap shoes and slip-on shoes with or
without elastic closures.

## See also

-   [Oxford shoe](/Oxford_shoe "wikilink")
-   [Derby shoe](/Derby_shoe "wikilink")
-   [Ghillies (dance)](/Ghillies_(dance) "wikilink")
-   [Monk shoe](/Monk_shoe "wikilink")
-   [Pampootie](/Pampootie "wikilink")

## Notes

## References

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

## External links

-

[Category:Shoes](/Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:History of
fashion](/Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Irish
clothing](/Category:Irish_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Scottish
clothing](/Category:Scottish_clothing "wikilink")