---
title: Cowboy boots
permalink: /Cowboy_boots/
---

**Cowboy boots** refer to a specific style of riding boot, historically
worn by cowboys. They have a high heel that is traditionally made of
stacked leather, rounded to pointed toe, high shaft, and, traditionally,
no lacing. Cowboy boots are normally made from cowhide leather, which
may be decoratively hand tooled, but are also sometimes made from
"exotic" skins like alligator, snake, ostrich, lizard, eel, elephant,
stingray, elk, buffalo, and so on.

There are two basic styles of cowboy boots, western (or classic), and
roper. The classic style is distinguished by a tall boot shaft, going to
at least mid-calf, with an angled "cowboy" heel, usually over one inch
high. A slightly lower, still angled, "walking" heel is also common. The
toe of western boots was originally rounded or squared in shape. The
narrow pointed toe design appeared in the early 1940s.

A newer design, the "roper" style, has a short boot shaft that stops
above the ankle but before the middle of the calf, with a very low and
squared-off "roper" heel, shaped to the sole of the boot, usually less
than one inch high. Roper boots are usually made with rounded toes, but,
correlating with style changes in streetwear, styles with a squared toe
are seen. The roper style is also manufactured in a lace-up design which
often fits better around the ankle and is less likely to slip off, but
lacing also creates safety issues for riding. They usually have some
sort of decorative stitching.

## Design

When mounting and, especially, dismounting, the slick, treadless leather
sole of the boot allowed easy insertion and removal of the foot into the
stirrup of the Western saddle. The original toe was rounded and a bit
narrowed at the toe to make it easier to insert. While an extremely
pointed toe is a modern stylization appearing in the 1940s, it adds no
practical benefit, and can be uncomfortable in a working boot.

While in the saddle, the tall heel minimized the risk of the foot
sliding forward through the stirrup, which could be life-threatening if
it happened and the rider were to be unseated. There was often
considerable risk that a cowboy would fall from a horse: he often had to
ride young, unpredictable horses, and he had to do challenging ranch
work in difficult terrain, which often meant that he could accidentally
become unseated by a quick-moving horse. If a rider fell from a horse
but had a boot get caught in the stirrup, there arose a very great risk
that the horse could panic and run off, dragging the cowboy, thus
causing severe injury and possible death.

The tall leather shaft of the boot helped to hold the boot in place in
the absence of lacing. The tall shaft, comfortably loose fit, and lack
of lacing all were additional features that helped prevent a cowboy from
being dragged since his body weight could pull his foot out of the boot
if he fell off while the boot remained stuck in the stirrup. While
mounted, the shaft also protected the lower leg and ankle from rubbing
on the stirrup leathers, as well as fending off brush and thorns,
particularly if also worn with chaps or chinks. While dismounted, the
shaft helped protect the leg and foot from rocks, brush, thorns, and
rattlesnakes. In wet weather or creek crossings, the high tops helped
prevent the boot from filling with mud and water.

The modern roper style boot with a low heel and shorter shaft emerged
from the traditional design in response to the needs of modern rodeo,
particularly calf roping, where the cowboy had to run to tie the calf as
well as to ride. The lower shaft resulted in a less expensive boot, but
also allowed the boot to be more easily removed. A lace-up design for
roper boots became popular as it prevented the boot from falling off too
easily and provided more ankle support when on foot, though the lacer
also has safety issues because it will not fall off if a rider is hung
up in a stirrup, and, lacking a smooth upper, the lacings themselves may
make it easier for the boot to become caught in the stirrup in the first
place.

Decoration varied widely. Early boots were cowhide leather pieced
together with single rows of top stitching, but as custom boots were
made, cowboys asked for decorative stitching, cutouts in the high tops
(early on, often Texas stars), and different materials. The interaction
of wild west shows and, later, western movies influenced styles that
working cowboys at times adopted. Modern cowboy boots are available in
all colors and can be made from just about every animal whose skin can
be made into leather, including exotic materials such as alligator and
ostrich.

Women's boots have become a major part of the more recent history of the
cowboy boot.

Toe styles have varied through the years, but the basics remain the
same. Popular toe styles include snip, wide snip, square, and round.

One accessory used with cowboy boots are spurs, which are sometimes
attached to the heel of each boot for the purpose of cueing a horse
while riding. [Category:Boots](/Category:Boots "wikilink")
[Category:Footwear](/Category:Footwear "wikilink") [Category:Old West
fashion](/Category:Old_West_fashion "wikilink")