---
title: Crocs
permalink: /Crocs/
---

Croc}}

**Crocs, Inc.** is an American company, based in [Niwot,
Colorado](/Niwot,_Colorado "wikilink"), that distributes and once
manufactured [foam](/foam "wikilink") [clog](/clog "wikilink") shoes.

## History

Crocs was founded by Lyndon "Duke" Hanson, and George Boedecker Jr. to
produce and distribute a [foam](/foam "wikilink")
[clog](/clog "wikilink")[1] design acquired from a company called Foam
Creations. The shoe was originally developed as a [boating
shoe](/boat_shoe "wikilink"). The first model produced by Crocs, the
*Beach*, was unveiled in 2002 at the [Fort
Lauderdale](/Fort_Lauderdale,_Florida "wikilink") Boat Show in Florida,
and sold out the 200 pairs produced at that time.[2] It has since sold
300 million pairs of shoes.[3]

## Manufacture and patents

In June 2004, Crocs purchased Foam Creations and their manufacturing
operations to secure exclusive rights to the proprietary
[foam](/foam "wikilink") [resin](/resin "wikilink") called Croslite.
Croslite is a closed-cell resin,[4][5] described by third parties as an
injection-moulded [EVA foam](/Ethylene-vinyl_acetate "wikilink").[6] The
foam forms itself to a wearer's feet and offers purported medical
benefits, according to a number of
[podiatrists](/podiatrist "wikilink").[7][8] Crocs holds one patent
covering "breathable workshoes and methods for manufacturing such", U.S.
Patent No.
[6993858](http://v3.espacenet.com/textdoc?DB=EPODOC&IDX=US6993858) B2
issued February 7, 2006, and three design patents covering various
ornamental aspects, U.S. Patent Nos.
[D517788](http://www.freepatentsonline.com/D517788.html),
[D517789](http://www.freepatentsonline.com/D517789.html), and
[D517790](http://www.freepatentsonline.com/D517790.html) issued on March
28, 2006.

As of 2007, the company had applied to register "Crocs" and the Crocs
logo as trademarks in over 40 jurisdictions around the world, including
the U.S.; many such applications were pending approval. Crocs also
extended the scope of their trademark registrations and applications for
both the Crocs mark and logo to cover non-footwear products, such as
sunglasses, goggles, knee pads, watches, luggage, and some of their
Internet sales activities.[9]

## Products

[thumb\|right\|Crocs are made in a variety of
colors.](/File:Crocs.JPG "wikilink") Crocs are made in a variety of
styles. They are manufactured in Crocs plants in Italy and Mexico, both
of which are slated to close by the end of 2018, whereupon Crocs
manufacturing will be entirely
[outsourced](/Outsourcing "wikilink").[10]

The shoes are produced in an array of colors, depending on the model.
The Classic styles are available in more than 20 colors; most other
styles are produced in a palette of four to six colors or two-color
combinations. There are different styles of Crocs that are made so they
can be worn in any season.

Crocs also sells other fashion accessories. Jibbitz are decorations that
can be clipped to the ventilation holes in the shoes. These include
designs, mainly aimed at children, which feature
[Disney](/The_Walt_Disney_Company "wikilink") characters. The company
has also released a line of purses in a variety of colors.

A "Fuzz Collection" with removable woolly liners extend the range into
winter wear.[11]

In 2008, the company entered the golf shoe marketplace, acquiring golf
shoe manufacturer Bite Footwear. A Croc-styled pair of golf shoes, the
*Ace,* was introduced.[12]

## Imitations and counterfeits

[thumb\|upright\|A Crocs imitation named Duralite sold in the
Philippines](/File:P2060240B.JPG "wikilink") Crocs announced in 2006
that it filed complaints with the [United States International Trade
Commission](/United_States_International_Trade_Commission "wikilink")
(ITC) and the [United States district
court](/United_States_district_court "wikilink") against 11 companies
that manufacture, import or distribute products, called "croc-offs",[13]
that Crocs believes infringe its patents.[14] Seizures of fake Crocs
occurred in 2007 in the Philippines[15] and Denmark,[16] and were under
litigation in South Africa.[17] In 2010, the [United States Court of
Appeals for the Federal
Circuit](/United_States_Court_of_Appeals_for_the_Federal_Circuit "wikilink")
held that Crocs' [design patent](/design_patent "wikilink") had been
infringed.[18]

In 2007, the [U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission](/U.S._Consumer_Product_Safety_Commission "wikilink")
requested a voluntary recall of Crocs-like clogs due to a potential
choking hazard involving detaching plastic rivets.[19]

Crocs-like brands include Airwalk, Crosskix, Poliwalks, USA
Dawgs/Doggers, Veggies, among others. Versions of the Croc style clogs
have appeared in children's fashion catalogs, usually under their own
name brands or as no names. Other knock-offs are in discount stores,
amusement park stores, beach stores, department stores, and
superstores.[20]

## Health and safety

[thumb\|upright\|Escalator safety sign warns: Take extra care when
wearing soft plastic
shoes](/File:Crocs_escalator_safety_warning_sign.jpg "wikilink")
[left\|thumb\|upright\|Crocs sandal](/File:Crocs_sandal.gif "wikilink")
Some Crocs shoes were tested and recommended by the U.S. Ergonomics
company in 2005[21] and were accepted by the [American Podiatric Medical
Association](/American_Podiatric_Medical_Association "wikilink")[22] in
2009.[23] In 2008, the U.S. government [Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid
Services](/Centers_for_Medicare_and_Medicaid_Services "wikilink")
approved a model of Crocs with molded insoles as [diabetic
footwear](/diabetic_shoe "wikilink"), to help reduce foot injuries.[24]

Footwear such as Crocs and [flip-flops](/flip-flops "wikilink") came
under scrutiny in 2006 in the U.S. and 2008 in Japan when children
suffered injuries after the shoes became caught in
[escalator](/escalator "wikilink") mechanisms.[25][26] This was due to
the soft shoe material combined with the smaller size of [children's
feet](/children's_feet "wikilink").[27] In 2008, Japan's [Ministry of
International Trade and
Industry](/Ministry_of_International_Trade_and_Industry "wikilink"),
after receiving 65 complaints of injuries, requested that Crocs change
its design.[28]

Internationally, some healthcare facilities introduced policies in 2007
regulating Crocs. [Rapid City](/Rapid_City,_South_Dakota "wikilink")
Regional Hospital in [South Dakota](/South_Dakota "wikilink") changed
its dress code to prohibit the sandal variants and those with holes,
citing safety concerns, but allowed closed-top "Professional" and the
healthcare-focused "Rx" Crocs to be worn.[29] Over 100 hospitals in
Canada were advised to implement similar policies.[30][31]
[Blekinge](/Blekinge "wikilink") and [Karolinska
University](/Karolinska_University_Hospital "wikilink") hospitals in
Sweden banned the wearing of "Forsberg slippers" (*Foppatofflor*)[32] by
staff, due to high voltage [static
electricity](/static_electricity "wikilink") buildup which was
observed[33] to interfere with electronic equipment.[34][35][36] City
hospitals in [Vienna](/Vienna "wikilink"),
[Austria](/Austria "wikilink") announced banning Crocs, often worn by
nursing staff, to comply with antistatic requirements.[37]

Crocs announced the Fuse and two others in 2009, formulated to dissipate
static electricity in accordance with European standard EN [ISO
20347](/ISO_20347 "wikilink"):2004 (E), for use in the medical
sector.[38]

## Acquisitions

[thumb\|Various types of Crocs with
accessories](/File:CrocsAccessories.jpg "wikilink") In October 2006,
Crocs Inc. purchased Jibbitz, a manufacturer of accessories that snap
into the holes in Crocs shoes, for $10 million, or $20 million if
Jibbitz met earnings goals.[39]

In January 2007, Crocs acquired assets of Ocean Minded[40] for $1.75
million in cash, plus potentially $3.75 million based on performance.
Ocean Minded makes [leather](/leather "wikilink") and [ethylene-vinyl
acetate](/ethylene-vinyl_acetate "wikilink")-based footwear.[41] In July
2007 Crocs agreed to buy shoe- and sandal-maker Bite Footwear, based in
[Redmond, Washington](/Redmond,_Washington "wikilink") for $1.75
million, or up to double that based on earnings results.[42]

In April 2008, Crocs acquired Tidal Trade, Inc. ("Tidal Trade"), the
company's third party distributor in South Africa, for $4.6 million. The
company recorded $1.4 million in customer relationships on the date of
acquisition. Crocs repurchased inventory previously sold to Tidal Trade
and accordingly recognized a reduction of revenue of approximately $2.1
million.[43] Also in April the company acquired Tagger International
B.V. ("Tagger"), a private limited liability company incorporated under
[Dutch](/Netherlands "wikilink") law that manufactures messenger bags.
Tagger was partially owned by the Managing Director of Crocs Europe B.V.
The company acquired all Tagger assets for $2 million – $90,000 for
inventory and $1.9 million for the Tagger trademark.[44] Later in June,
Crocs liquidated Fury, Inc. two years after acquiring it,[45] after
efforts to sell it off were unsuccessful. As a result, Crocs wrote off
$250,000 related to the remaining customer relationships, intangible
assets and trademarks over three months.[46]

## Influence on fashion and culture

[thumb\|In a 2007 episode of his [TV
series](Real_Time_with_Bill_Maher "wikilink"), comedian Bill Maher
stated, "New Rule: Stop wearing plastic
shoes."](/File:RTBM-07-08-24.jpg "wikilink") Starting in 2006, sales of
Crocs increased dramatically,[47] with first-quarterly sales roughly
tripling from 2006 to 2007, according to *The New York Times*.[48] An
article in *[The Washington Post](/The_Washington_Post "wikilink")*
described the phenomenon: "Nor is the fashion world enamored of Crocs.
Though their maker touts their 'ultra-hip Italian styling,' lots of
folks find them hideous."[49] [Tim Gunn](/Tim_Gunn "wikilink"), fashion
consultant, told *[Time](/Time_(magazine) "wikilink")* magazine,
"... the Croc – it looks like a plastic hoof. How can you take that
seriously?"[50] A 2008 anti-Crocs essay by [Steve
Tuttle](/Steve_Tuttle "wikilink") in *Newsweek*[51] generated much
response from readers who both agreed and disagreed with it.[52]

In 2007, then-President [George W. Bush](/George_W._Bush "wikilink")
wore black Crocs with socks publicly.[53] In August 2009, First Lady
[Michelle Obama](/Michelle_Obama "wikilink") was spotted wearing Crocs
with her daughter.[54] On June 14, 2015, 23-month-old [Prince
George](/Prince_George_of_Cambridge "wikilink"), son of [Prince
William](/Prince_William "wikilink") and [Kate
Middleton](/Kate_Middleton "wikilink"), was photographed at a charity
event wearing navy blue crocs. After one week, this created a 1,500
percent increase of sales, according to an
[Amazon.com](/Amazon_(company) "wikilink") spokesperson.[55][56]

Crocs were ranked #6 on the "Worst" list of
*[Maxim](/Maxim_(magazine) "wikilink")*{{'}}s "The 10 Best & Worst
Things to Happen to Men in 2007."[57] In May 2010, *Time* magazine
listed Crocs as one of the world's "50 Worst Inventions".[58]

The shoes have been targets of satire: on *[Real Time with Bill
Maher](/Real_Time_with_Bill_Maher "wikilink")*, Maher called for a "New
rule: stop wearing plastic shoes,"[59] and *[The Daily
Show](/The_Daily_Show "wikilink")* "Senior Public Restroom
Correspondent" Rob Corddry, following up on the Senator [Larry
Craig](/Larry_Craig "wikilink") June 2007 lewd conduct arrest,
"reported" that anyone wearing Crocs is signalling "anything goes".[60]

A [blog](/blog "wikilink") named IHateCrocs.com was founded by two
Canadian college students (one, [Kate Leth](/Kate_Leth "wikilink"),
referred to the shoes as "hideous"), while the website CrocFans.com
documents uses of the shoes.[61] The [Facebook](/Facebook "wikilink")
group, *I Don't Care How Comfortable Crocs Are, You Look Like a
Dumbass*, has been mentioned in the media.[62][63][64]

Crocs was the title sponsor of the [Association of Volleyball
Professionals](/Association_of_Volleyball_Professionals "wikilink")
(AVP) Tour from 2006 through the 2009 season.[65][66]

## Stock

Crocs completed the initial public offering of its common stock in
February 2006. It began trading on the NASDAQ Stock Market under the
symbol CROX. On October 30, 2007, the stock dropped 24% when the company
announced decreased revenue projections.[67] On April 14, 2008, during
the midst of the [financial crisis of
2007–2008](/financial_crisis_of_2007–2008 "wikilink"), the stock dropped
30% in [after-hours trading](/Extended-hours_trading "wikilink") after
the company issued a press release in which they significantly decreased
earnings estimates for the first quarter. In the same statement they
also said they would [lay off](/Layoff "wikilink") its 600 [Quebec
City](/Quebec_City "wikilink") factory employees as retailers have been
reducing orders, though about 100 sales and marketing positions would
remain. "The retail environment in the U.S. has become increasingly
challenging as consumer spending and traffic levels have slowed," [chief
executive officer](/chief_executive_officer "wikilink") Ron Snyder said.
During the financial crisis, CROX dropped to as low as $0.79 before
rebounding ($15.50 by November 2010).[68] On October 18, 2011, Crocs
stock suffered a single day drop of about 39.4% on lowered earnings and
revenues forecast.[69]

In June 2013, Crocs reported a 42.5% decrease in net profits from a year
before. As a result, the stock fell 20.2% in one day.[70]

In December 2013, embattled hedge fund SAC Capital Advisors has
disclosed a 5% stake in footwear manufacturer Crocs just over a day
after The Blackstone Group said it would invest $200 million in a
convertible preferred stock offering that will allow the company to
replace its CEO and buy back $350 million in stock. SAC Capital
management said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission
it had accumulated a 5% passive stake in Crocs.[71]

## Restructuring

On 21 July 2014, Crocs, Inc. announced a restructuring plan to
streamline its operations and workforce by eliminating 180 jobs, close
75 to 100 stores (out of 624 worldwide) as well as scrapping
underperforming product lines. Crocs has previously eliminated 183
positions, including 70 current and planned positions in its corporate
headquarters in Niwot, Colorado. Crocs also announced they would open a
"global commercial center" with 50 to 75 employees in [Boston,
Massachusetts](/Boston,_Massachusetts "wikilink") in 2014, for
merchandising, marketing and retail functions.[72] In August 2018 Crocs
announced it was closing its last company-operated manufacturing plants
in Mexico and Italy.[73]

## References

## External links

-   [Crocs Official Website](http://www.crocs.com)

[Category:Companies listed on
NASDAQ](/Category:Companies_listed_on_NASDAQ "wikilink")
[Category:Companies based in Boulder County,
Colorado](/Category:Companies_based_in_Boulder_County,_Colorado "wikilink")
[Category:Manufacturing companies based in
Colorado](/Category:Manufacturing_companies_based_in_Colorado "wikilink")
[Category:Clothing companies of the United
States](/Category:Clothing_companies_of_the_United_States "wikilink")
[Category:Shoe companies of the United
States](/Category:Shoe_companies_of_the_United_States "wikilink")
[Category:Clothing companies established in
2002](/Category:Clothing_companies_established_in_2002 "wikilink")
[Category:Shoe brands](/Category:Shoe_brands "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](/Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](/Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2002
establishments in
Colorado](/Category:2002_establishments_in_Colorado "wikilink")
[Category:2006 initial public
offerings](/Category:2006_initial_public_offerings "wikilink")

[1] Anderson, Diane (November 3, 2006). He was also the founder of Sea
World. ["When Crocs attack, an ugly shoe
tale"](http://money.cnn.com/2006/11/02/magazines/business2/crocs_whatworks.biz2/index.htm).
*[Business 2.0](/Business_2.0 "wikilink")*. [CNN](/CNN "wikilink").

[2] Wellington, Elizabeth (July 5, 2007).["Fashion
Attack"](http://www.philly.com/inquirer/columnists/elizabeth_wellington/20070705_Fashion_Attack.html).
*[The Philadelphia Inquirer](/The_Philadelphia_Inquirer "wikilink")*.
Retrieved August 25, 2007.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] ["Form 10-K for Crocs
Inc."](https://web.archive.org/web/20060629020346/http://biz.yahoo.com/e/060331/crox10-k.html)
"Crocs 2006 Annual Report". Yahoo!Finance. March 31, 2006. Archive.
Accessed April 29, 2007.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13] ["A chip off the ol' Croc, Sure, they're ugly. But the popular,
funky clogs have plenty of imitators at their
feet."](http://nl.newsbank.com/nl-search/we/Archives?p_product=ST&s_site=dfw&p_multi=ST&p_theme=realcities&p_action=search&p_maxdocs=200&p_topdoc=1&p_text_direct-0=11B7F7B2778C2B48&p_field_direct-0=document_id&p_perpage=10&p_sort=YMD_date:D&s_trackval=GooglePM)
*[Fort Worth Star-Telegram](/Fort_Worth_Star-Telegram "wikilink")* (TX).
September 7, 2007. p E3.

[14]

[15] ["NBI seizes P16-million fake Crocs
footwear"](https://archive.today/20120906101807/http://www.philstar.com/Article.aspx?articleId=547347).
[The Philippine Star](/The_Philippine_Star "wikilink"). February 7,
2010.

[16] ["Burning
rubber"](http://www.cphpost.dk/news/crime/45912-burning-rubber.html).
[The Copenhagen Post](/The_Copenhagen_Post "wikilink") online. June 10,
2009.

[17] Schroeder, Fatime (February 28, 2007). ["'Fake Crocs' battle going
to
court"](http://www.iol.co.za/news/south-africa/fake-crocs-battle-going-to-court-1.316963).
South Africa: *[Independent
Online](/Independent_Online_(South_Africa) "wikilink")*. Independent
Newspapers (Pty) Limited.

[18]

[19] ["Payless ShoeSource Expands Recall of Children's Clog Shoes Due to
Choking Hazard"](http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/prerel/prhtml07/07236.html)
. [U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission](/U.S._Consumer_Product_Safety_Commission "wikilink"). July
17, 2007.

[20]

[21] Costello, Kevin (March 7, 2005). ["Ergonomics Analyses of Crocs
Footwear. Prepared for Crocs
Inc."](https://www.open24.lv/files/uploaded/ergonomics-analyses-of-crocs-footwear.pdf)*us-ergo.com*;
U.S. Ergonomics. Archived at Open24.lt. Retrieved June 6, 2010.

[22] ["Footwear with APMA Seal of
Acceptance"](http://www.apma.org/workfootwear) *apma.org*; [American
Podiatric Medical
Association](/American_Podiatric_Medical_Association "wikilink").
October 7, 2009. Note: CrocsRX is a Corporate Partner in [American
Podiatric Medical
Association](/American_Podiatric_Medical_Association "wikilink") at the
[$100000-$249999 contributions
level](http://www.apma.org/MainMenu/CorporateOpportunities/CorporateMembersProgram/APMA-Corporate-Members.aspx)
per APMA.org. 2009.

[23]

[24] AP (July 18, 2008). ["Crocs get a lift from diabetics as medical
agency OKs footwear"](http://www.denverpost.com/business/ci_9915938).
*[The Denver Post](/The_Denver_Post "wikilink")*, based on Crocs press
release. Retrieved May 31, 2010.

[25] Snow, Kate (October 5, 2006). ["Crocs can pose a danger on
escalators"](http://abclocal.go.com/kgo/story?section=news/bizarre&id=4630653)
. *ABC News.*. Retrieved April 19, 2007.

[26] AP (April 21, 2008). ["Kids Hurt While Wearing Crocs on
Escalators"](http://abcnews.go.com/Business/story?id=4694425&page=1).
*ABC Business News*. Retrieved November 5, 2009.

[27] ["Experts recommend caution while wearing
clogs"](http://www.wmctv.com/global/story.asp?s=5441435) *WMC-TV Memphis
Tennessee.* September 21, 2006. Retrieved April 19, 2007.

[28]

[29] Garrigan, Mary (February 1, 2007). ["Holey Crocs get the boot at
Regional
Hospital"](http://www.rapidcityjournal.com/news/local/top-stories/article_22ac3d31-4840-5140-b60f-3698fb2e3d6a.html)
*[Rapid City Journal](/Rapid_City_Journal "wikilink")*. Retrieved April
18, 2007.

[30] Talaga, Tanya (July 24, 2007). ["No Crocs for docs and
nurses?"](https://www.thestar.com/news/article/239048) *[Toronto
Star](/Toronto_Star "wikilink")*. Retrieved June 4, 2010.

[31] AP and Olafson, Joe (July 31, 2007). ["Crocs clampdown sparks
health-care
debate"](https://www.ctvnews.ca/crocs-clampdown-sparks-health-care-debate-1.250785).
[CTV News](/CTV_News "wikilink").

[32] *Foppatofflor* is a Swedish nickname for Crocs, after [Peter
"Foppa" Forsberg](/Peter_Forsberg "wikilink"), Sweden's Crocs importer.

[33] ["Requirements to stop slippers after dangerous
incidents"](http://www.dagensmedicin.se/nyheter/2007/04/17/krav-att-tofflor-stoppas-e/)
. *Dagens Medicin* ([SE](/Sweden "wikilink")). April 18, 2007. [(English
translation)](https://translate.google.com/translate?u=http%3A//www.dagensmedicin.se/nyheter/2007/04/17/krav-att-tofflor-stoppas-e/&hl=en&langpair=auto%7Cen&tbb=1&ie=ISO-8859-1).
Retrieved June 6, 2010.

[34] ["Swedish hospital to ban
'Foppatoffels'"](http://www.thelocal.se/7034/20070418/) *The Local*
(Sweden), April 18, 2007. Retrieved April 20, 2007.

[35] AP (April 19, 2007). ["Plastic clogs disrupt machinery in Swedish
hospital"](https://www.theguardian.com/international/story/0,,2061288,00.html)
*Guardian Unlimited ([AP](/Associated_Press "wikilink"))*. Retrieved
April 19, 2007.

[36] ["Karolinska prohibits foppa
slippers"](http://www.dagensmedicin.se/nyheter/2007/04/27/karolinska-forbjuder-foppa/)
. *Dagens Medicin* ([SE](/Sweden "wikilink")), April 27, 2007. [(English
translation)](https://translate.google.com/translate?u=http%3A//www.dagensmedicin.se/nyheter/2007/04/27/karolinska-forbjuder-foppa/&hl=en&langpair=auto%7Cen&tbb=1&ie=ISO-8859-1).
Retrieved June 6, 2010.

[37] [SAPA](/South_African_Press_Association "wikilink")-[AFP](/Agence_France-Presse "wikilink")
(August 12, 2008). ["Vienna hospitals ban
Crocs"](http://www.mg.co.za/article/2008-08-12-vienna-hospitals-ban-crocs)
*Mail & Guardian Online*. Retrieved August 13, 2008.

[38]

[39] ["Crocs closes on Jibbitz
purchase"](http://www.bizjournals.com/denver/stories/2006/12/04/daily12.html?jst=s_cn_hl).
*[Denver Business
Journal](/American_City_Business_Journals#Newspapers "wikilink")*.
December 5, 2006. Retrieved May 31, 2010.

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45] ["CROCS(TM) Inc. Announces Acquisition of
Fury"](http://www.lexdon.com/article/crocs%28tm%29_inc._announces_acquisition_of/74442.html)
. *lexdon.com*; Lexdon Business Library. January 11, 2007. Retrieved May
31, 2010.

[46]

[47]

[48] Walker, Rob (July 15, 2007). ["Croc
On"](https://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/15/magazine/15wwln-consumed-t.html?ex=1342065600&en=777eba4c1b67c6d7&ei=5124&partner=digg&exprod=digg).
*[The New York Times
Magazine](/The_New_York_Times_Magazine "wikilink")*. Retrieved May 31,
2010.

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53] Gilbert, Sarah (June 14, 2007). ["George Bush cozy with Crocs CEO:
An ugly tide that raises two
boats?"](https://web.archive.org/web/20070616133202/http://www.bloggingstocks.com/2007/06/14/george-bush-cozy-with-crocs-ceo-an-ugly-tide-that-raises-two-bo/)
*bloggingstocks.com*; AOL Money & Finance. Retrieved July 7, 2010.

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59] "It was only a year ago when only pre-schoolers and mental patients
wore these. But now grownups, all over America, have gone Croc crazy.
The latest step in our unending quest to dress as casually as humanly
possible. You know, I used to wear flip-flops, but they were a little
dressy. I want clothing I can hose down! Admit it: we're a nation of
slobs who won't be happy until we can go to the mall in a diaper."

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69] Weinstein, Robert (October 18, 2011). ["Crocs Earnings: Company
Trips On Laces, Falls Face
First"](http://seekingalpha.com/article/300392-crocs-earnings-company-trips-on-laces-falls-face-first).
SeekingAlpha.com.

[70]

[71]

[72] Wallace, Alicia (July 21, 2014). ["Niwot-based Crocs laying off
more than 180, closing stores in major
restructuring"](http://www.dailycamera.com/boulder-business/ci_26190575/niwot-based-crocs-plans-layoffs-store-closures-major).
*[Daily Camera](/Daily_Camera "wikilink")*.

[73]