---
title: Go-go boots
permalink: /Go-go_boots/
---

**Go-go boots** are a low-heeled style of women's fashion boot first
introduced in the mid-1960s. The original go-go boots, as defined by
André Courrèges in 1964, were white, low-heeled, and mid-calf in height,
a specific style which is sometimes called the **Courrèges boot**. Since
then, the term go-go boot has come to include the knee-high, square-toed
boots with block heels that were very popular in the 1960s and 1970s; as
well as a number of variations including kitten heeled versions and
colours other than white.

## Etymology

The term *go-go* is derived from the French expression *à gogo*, meaning
"in abundance, galore", which is in turn derived from the ancient French
word *la gogue* for "joy, happiness". The term "go-go" has also been
explained as a 1964 back-formation of the 1962 slang term "go", meaning
something that was "all the rage"; the term "go-go dancer" first
appeared in print in 1965. The go-go boot is presumed to have been named
after the dance style.

## Adoption

Fashion boots were revived in the early 1960s by designers such as Beth
Levine, although at first they featured fashionable high heels such as
the stiletto and kitten heels. The earliest go-go boots were mid-calf,
white and flat-heeled, as seen in the work of the designer André
Courrèges, who is often credited with creating the style. The simple
minimalism of the Courrèges boot was easily and widely reproduced for
the mass market. Courrèges boots provided the foundation for the
development of the go-go boot, which increasingly came higher up the leg
and was made in alternative colours. While remaining low-ish, the heel
also became higher and chunkier. The earliest Courrèges boots were made
of leather, such as kidskin or patent leather, but many of the
subsequent versions and copies were made in PVC, vinyl, and other
plastics.

In 1966, the song "These Boots Are Made for Walkin'" was released and
performed by a go-go boot wearing Nancy Sinatra, who is credited with
further popularising the boot. Tim Gunn suggests that Sinatra helped
establish the boot as "a symbol of female power". Female dancers on the
television shows *Hullabaloo* and *Shindig!* also wore the short, white
boots. This led to the boots sometimes being called 'hullabaloo boots,'
as in an advertisement run in American newspapers in January 1966 for
hullabaloo boots with "kooky heels and zipper backs" for the "Go-Go
Getter".Fashion boots were revived in the early 1960s by designers such
as Beth Levine, although at first they featured fashionable high heels
such as the stiletto and kitten heels. The earliest go-go boots were
mid-calf, white and flat-heeled, as seen in the work of the designer
André Courrèges, who is often credited with creating the style. The
simple minimalism of the Courrèges boot was easily and widely reproduced
for the mass market. Courrèges boots provided the foundation for the
development of the go-go boot, which increasingly came higher up the leg
and was made in alternative colours. While remaining low-ish, the heel
also became higher and chunkier. The earliest Courrèges boots were made
of leather, such as kidskin or patent leather, but many of the
subsequent versions and copies were made in PVC, vinyl, and other
plastics.

In 1966, the song "These Boots Are Made for Walkin'" was released and
performed by a go-go boot wearing Nancy Sinatra, who is credited with
further popularising the boot. Tim Gunn suggests that Sinatra helped
establish the boot as "a symbol of female power". Female dancers on the
television shows *Hullabaloo* and *Shindig!* also wore the short, white
boots. This led to the boots sometimes being called 'hullabaloo boots,'
as in an advertisement run in American newspapers in January 1966 for
hullabaloo boots with "kooky heels and zipper backs" for the "Go-Go
Getter".

In the mid-1990s, as part of a general revival of 1960s fashions, go-go
boots came back into style.