---
title: Jodhpur boots
permalink: /Jodhpur_boots/
---

The **jodhpur boot** is an ankle boot or Chelsea boot designed as a
riding boot with a rounded toe and a low heel. They originally fastened
with a strap and buckle, but today the term also includes designs with
straps that do not wrap entirely around the ankle and the elastic-sided
design without a strap also known as Chelsea boots. A closely related
riding boot design is called a paddock boot, particularly if modified to
have a lace-up front. It is named after Jodhpur, the second-largest city
in the Indian state of Rajasthan.

## History

Jodhpur boots originated in India in the 1920s, and were first worn by
local polo riders. The wearing of jodhpurs soon became a trend in the
Western world, and Saks Fifth Avenue began selling them in as early as
1927. A *Vogue* article in that year, titled "A Habit for Informal
Cross-Saddle Dressing", wrote that jodhpur boots were "correct in every
detail for summer shows" and meant to be complemented with a swagger
stick and canary string gloves.

## Fitting

The vamp is sewn on top of the quarters. (A monk strap boot also fastens
with a buckle, but the quarters are sewn on top of the vamp.) The strap
is typically in two parts, each attached to the vamp. The buckle end is
attached to the inboard side and extends halfway around the ankle,
counterclockwise on the right boot. The free end is attached to the
outboard side and extends entirely around the ankle, clockwise on the
right boot. There is typically a loop sewn to the back of the boot that
both strap ends can be passed through.
[Category:Footwear](/Category:Footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](/Category:Boots "wikilink")