---
title: Mary Jane
permalink: /Mary_Jane/
---

**Mary Jane** (also known as bar shoes or "doll shoes") is an American
term (formerly a registered trademark) for a closed, low-cut shoe with
one or more straps across the instep.

Classic Mary Janes for children are typically made of black leather or
patent leather, have one thin strap fastened with a buckle or button, a
broad and rounded toebox, low heels, and thin outsoles. Among girls,
Mary Janes are traditionally worn with pantyhose or socks or completely
without them, and a dress or a skirt and blouse. Among boys (less
common), Mary Janes are traditionally worn with socks (or without them
as well), short trousers and a shirt.

## History

Children's shoes secured by a strap over the instep and fastened with a
buckle or button appeared in the early 20th century. Originally worn by
both sexes, they began to be perceived as being mostly for girls during
the 1930s in North America and the 1940s in Europe. They were also
popular with women in the 1920s.

Today, Mary Janes for children, particularly the more classic styles,
are often considered semi-formal or formal shoes, appropriate for school
(many schools worldwide require that girls wear them with their
uniform), religious ceremonies, weddings, visits, and birthday parties
for example. More modern styles are also worn in casual settings,
however: playgrounds, shopping centers, sports (Mary Jane sneakers),
etc. Although less popular than in the past, Mary Janes remain a
timeless classic of children's fashion and, for many people, a symbol of
girlhood.

Moreover, Mary Janes are a preferred accessory of many traditional or
folk costumes, such as those of the flamenco female dancer and of the
typical woman in Mao's China and the Kims' North Korea.

## Etymology

Mary Jane was a character created by Richard Felton Outcault, "Father of
the Sunday Comic Strip", for his comic strip *Buster Brown*, which was
first published in 1902. She was the "sweetheart" of the title character
Buster Brown and was drawn from real life, as she was also Outcault's
daughter of the same name. In Outcault's own words—and his
daughter's—she was the only character drawn from life in the Buster
Brown strip, although "Mrs. Brown" did resemble Outcault's wife.

In 1904, Outcault traveled to the St. Louis World's Fair and sold
licenses to up to 200 companies to use the Buster Brown characters to
advertise their products. Among them was the Brown Shoe Company, which
later hired actors to tour the country, performing as the Buster Brown
characters in theaters and stores. This strategy helped the Brown Shoe
Company become the most prominently associated brand with the Buster
Brown characters. The style of shoe both Buster Brown and Mary Jane wore
came to be known by her name, Mary Jane.

## Adult styles

While the classic Mary Jane still retains its wide popularity and
appeal, platform style Mary Janes have also evolved since the late
1990s, with 1-cm to 3-cm (½-in to 1-in) outsoles and 8-cm to 13-cm (3-in
to 5-in) "chunky" heels, often with exaggerated grommets or buckles. The
1920s-style Mary Janes were a famous part of flappers' ensembles, thus
reinforcing the childlike style the flappers had. These styles were
especially popular in the United States in the late 1990s and early
2000s, within punk rock, psychobilly and goth subcultures. Many times
the wearers would accent the look with knee-high knit socks in
dark-colored stripes or patterns and/or some form of hosiery
(stockings/pantyhose), and often complete the look with a plaid, pleated
schoolgirl-style skirt.

Velma Dinkley, member of the fictional *Scooby-Doo* gang, is most
notably attributed to donning a red pair of Mary Jane shoes.

During the early 2000s, block-heeled Mary Jane shoes were popular in the
United Kingdom and were fastened by a rectangular chrome buckle and were
made under various brand names such as *No Doubt*, *Koi Couture* etc.

Mary Janes are a popular part of kinderwhore and Lolita fashion. A pump
with a strap across the instep may be referred to as a "Mary Jane pump",
although it does not have the low heels or wide toe of the original Mary
Jane (and a pump is generally strapless by definition).
[Category:Footwear](/Category:Footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Shoes](/Category:Shoes "wikilink")