---
title: Motorcycle boots
permalink: /Motorcycle_boots/
---

**Motorcycle boots** are associated with motorcycle riders and range
from above ankle to below knee boots. They have an outside of a typical
boot but a low heel to control the motorcycle. To improve motorcycle
safety, motorcycle boots are generally made from a thick, heavy leather
and may include energy absorbing and load spreading padding, metal,
plastic and/or composite materials to protect the motorcycle rider's
feet, ankles and legs in an accident. For use in wet weather, some boots
have a waterproof membrane lining such as Gore-Tex or SympaTex.

Depending upon how form-fitting the boot is, to allow a rider to easily
get the boot on or off, the shaft may be designed to open lengthwise. If
so, Velcro or other hook-and-loop fasteners are typically used on the
inner sides of the opening to allow the rider to close the boot over the
foot, ankle and leg. This allows for some flexibility for the rider to
control the boot's tightness. Some manufacturers also include an
internal quick-lacing system between a soft inner leg and the harder
outer shell of the boot shaft to further ensure a tight, but comfortable
fit. The heel of a racing boot is typically very low: not more than
1/2-inch (13 mm), and sole of the heel and foot is typically rather
smooth. A curved plastic or composite plate may be included to cover the
shin of the boot to protect the rider's shin.

## Racing boots

Similar to touring boots, racing boots are designed for riding a
motorcycle on hard pavement (either the street or a race track) and are
usually between 10 and 14 inches in height and made from a combination
of leather, metal, plastic and/or man-made composite materials to create
a form-fitting, but comfortable boot. The amount of armored protection
provided by racing boots is usually greater than touring boots due to
the increased potential for injury at the high speeds needed for racing.
Typical protection areas are reinforced to protect the shin, instep,
ankle (medial and lateral) heel and toes. Often a high-wear pad of metal
or composite is attached to the lateral side (outside) of the toe, as
this area can contact the ground during extreme cornering. The optimum
racing boot has the necessary protection for impact and abrasion while
maintaining excellent single-axis flexibility at the ankle between the
boot lower and the shaft; for shifting and braking.

Styles vary between "inside" and "outside" Boots meaning that some
styles are meant to be worn over the bottom leg of the leather race
suit, and some are designed to be worn inside the leg, these having a
thinner top shaft.

## Touring / street boots

Similar to racing boots, touring boots are designed specifically for
riding a motorcycle on hard pavement, but with less armored protection
than racing boots since they are intended for riders that typically ride
on city streets and highways, not race tracks. They are usually between
10 and 14 inches in height and made from a combination of leather,
metal, hard rubber, plastic and/or man-made fabrics to create a
form-fitting, but comfortable boot.

## Motocross boots

Motocross boots are designed specifically for off-road, motocross (MX)
or all-terrain vehicle riding. To help prevent a rider's feet and legs
from being injured, motocross boots are typically much stiffer than
regular motorcycle boots or racing boots, but are more flexible than ski
boots by comparison.

Modern motocross boots are usually nearly knee-high (about 16 inches in
height) and made from a combination of leather, metal, plastic and/or
man-made composite materials to create a very form-fitting, comfortable
and tight boot. To allow a rider to easily get the boot on or off, the
shaft of a motocross boot is designed to open lengthwise. Multiple
adjustable straps (usually 3 to 4) are deployed along the foot, ankle
and shaft of the boot to allow the rider to tighten the boot to his/her
preferences and comfort. A curved plastic or composite plate covers the
shin of the boot to protect the rider from debris that may be thrown
from the front wheel of the motorcycle.

## Police boots

Motorcycle police boots are designed specifically to be worn by
motorcycle police officers. Very similar to riding boots, motorcycle
police boots are typically knee-high (between 18 and 21 inches in
height), the foot and shaft are made from black, smooth-grained,
high-gloss leather and the low-heeled sole is made from hard rubber. The
boots are typically form-fitting and intended to be worn over breeches
or jodhpurs as part of the officer's uniform. The most notable
manufacturers for boots to the UK police force are Goldtop (pre 1980s),
and Alt-berg (post 1980s).

## Engineer boots

Engineer boots are a long-established style of boots used by people in a
number of occupations in addition to motorcyclists.

## Harness boots

Harness boots are very similar to engineer boots. The boots are most
often made of heavy weight leather and range in height from short (10
inches) to extra high (38 inches). The most typical height is between 10
and 18 inches. The most common color is black, but brown harness boots
are also made.

Harness boots are designed to protect the motorcycle rider from the heat
of the exhaust pipes and the engine block and from injury to the foot
and leg in the case of an accident while riding and may include a
built-in steel toe cap and metal shank in the heel. Whereas engineer
boots have a rounded toe, harness boots typically have a square toe.
Unlike engineer boots that have an adjustable leather strap across the
ankle, harness boots have a non-adjustable system of four leather straps
and two metal rings: one strap goes across the top of the foot at the
ankle, one strap wraps around the rear of the foot at the ankle and two
more straps rise from sole on either side ankle. The four straps are
held in place by the two metal rings that are located on either side of
the ankle. Typically, these boots possess a pair of pull-straps on
either side of the tops of the shafts. Some manufacturers replace these
straps with an adjustable leather strap located on the outside top of
the shafts, similar to engineer boots. Soles and heels are usually made
of hard rubber and may either be relatively flat or may have lugs for
increased traction.

Harness boots were originally modeled on the square toed boots prevalent
in the 19th century, including those worn by American Civil War
soldiers. Leather straps and rings were added to this style in the
1960s, creating the modern version of the harness boot, which quickly
became a classic. [Category:Boots](/Category:Boots "wikilink")
[Category:Footwear](/Category:Footwear "wikilink")