---
title: Mule (shoe)
permalink: /Mule_(shoe)/
---

**Mule** is a style of [shoe](/shoe "wikilink") that has no back or
constraint around the foot's heel. Mules have a history going as back as
Ancient Rome, even though they were not popularly worn until
sixteenth-century Europe. There, mules were bedroom slippers and not
worn in public. Through the centuries, mules have changed in style and
purpose and are no longer just boudoir shoes but are worn at any time,
for any occasion. In addition to Western examples, mules come from
cultures such as Turkey and Egypt, and appear in popular culture, from
famous paintings to iconic celebrities' shoes.

## History

### Etymology and original purpose

Mule's etymology comes from Ancient Rome. In Ancient Rome, the phrase
"*mulleus calceus*" was used to describe the red or purple shoe worn by
the three Roman senators and later higher magistrates.[1] In 16th
century Europe and France, the Latin root word "mule" was used to refer
to both backless shoes and slippers.[2]

Mules of the 16th century to the 19th century were bedroom or boudoir
slippers worn inside and not out in public. Accordingly, mules were worn
with dressing gowns and typically matched the loose outfits by having
the same comfort. The early mules did not have any distinguishable
features.[3][thumb\|18th Century embroidered
Mule](/File:Mules_MET_54.61.101a-b_CP4.jpg "wikilink") This style of
shoe has a storied history and when Comtesse d’Olonne, the risqué
society beauty, wore a soft red pair of mules to church in 1694 –
daringly peeping from beneath her richly-embellished skirt – it paved
the way for the style.[4]

### History of their popularity

While mules have been worn since the 15th century to the present day,
their popularity has not always been constant. They were typical indoor
shoes for both men and women in the early 1700s. By the 1720s to the end
of the century, mules were the most popular indoor slipper. [Fashion
plates](/Fashion_plate "wikilink") that exist from the end of the 1790s
describe women wearing mules but are not seen due to the long lengths of
the contemporary [petticoats](/petticoat "wikilink"). Therefore, they
were popular by the end of the 1700 but not as visible. In the beginning
of the 1800s mules went out of style. In the mid to early 1800s, they
rose in popularity again.[5] In the 1860s, prostitutes wore mules in the
brothels while most others avoided wearing them.[6] In the twentieth
century, mules were again in fashion as they embraced the trends. They
were especially popular during the end of the 1990s in the high-fashion
as elite designers put their own touch on the mule.[7] The twenty-first
century has accepted and rejected the mule trend. Most recently, [Elle
magazine](/Elle_(magazine) "wikilink") called mules the shoe of 2017.[8]

## Styles

[left\|thumb\|18th Century high heel mules of [Catherine the
Great](Catherine_the_Great "wikilink"),
1770s](/File:Catherine_great's_shoes.jpg "wikilink") Mules have changed
in style over time. In the fifteenth century mules from
[Venice](/Venice "wikilink") were stilted and resembled chopines.[9]
Their toes were of all shapes: round, square and forked. The heel
similarly was not constrained in height.
[Heels](/High-heeled_footwear "wikilink") ranged from 1 5/8 inches to 2
½ inches. Mules were embroidered across centuries from 1550 to 1700.[10]
For example, Florentine embroidery, which is a flame stitch of various
lengths, was popular during the 18th century.[11] Throughout the 1700s,
mules were regularly heeled and worn by both men and women.[12] During
the middle to late 1720–1790 the shoe structure itself was relatively
dull and boring not to distract from eye-catchy buckles.[13] By 1850s,
heeled mules were less frequent for men. From 1885 to 1910, the trend of
large buckles and elaborate trims was replaced by less decorated low
heeled leather and felt shoes.[14] [thumb\|Mules decorated in the
fashion of the 1980s](/File:Flower_mules.jpg "wikilink") In the
twentieth century wartime mules of the 1940s were made of lino,
[oilcloth](/oilcloth "wikilink"), [felt](/felt "wikilink"), compounds of
raffia, [rattan](/rattan "wikilink"), bark or synthetic hemp.[15] 1950s
mules were made from plastic and decorated with feathers. The
[marabou](/Marabou_(fashion) "wikilink") mule promoted the time periods
"sex-kitten" ideals.[16] The styles for mules in the 1960s and in the
1980s mirrored the shoe trends of their respective decades. For the
1960s, mules had angular shapes and pointy toes.[17] In the 1980s, this
meant that mules were colorful, opulent, and highly accessorized with
jewels.[18]

### Mules for men

Mules not only came in different styles and various decorations, but
also can be categorized by distinct types. In the nineteenth century,
two male slippers were very popular mules. In the late 1880s, a very
popular version of the mule at the time in England was the Albert.[19]
In addition to the Albert, the Alfred was also a man's boudoir/ morning
slipper. This name comes from Daniel Green and Company 1892's "Alfred
Dolge's Felt Slippers and Shoes."[20]

## Mules in the East

[thumb\|Early 20th century mule by Pierre Yantorny that is inspired by
the east. \|left](/File:Mules_MET_53.267.17a-b_CP4.jpg "wikilink") Mules
also appear in eastern cultures. This history is similarly rich
originating from the 800s and still present today. In eighth century
Egypt, mules are depicted on gravestones and seem to be made of red
kid.[21] Iranian mules from 1800–1889 were made of velvet, leather,
silk, metal thread. They are shaped like a fish.[22] A mule from Turkey
in the [Metropolitan Museum's](/Metropolitan_Museum_of_Art "wikilink")
collection is made of wood, leather, metal, and silk.[23] Mules from
India were made from cow, buffalo or goat hide, fur, silk, wool, or
cotton fiber, velvets, brocade and reeds and grass. Similar to the
European examples, mules in India were embroidered and embellished with
tassels and appliqué. In South Asia, a jutti is a type of shoe that is
similar to the mule because it does not have backs.[24] Sometimes, mules
resemble Turkish [babouche](/wikt:babouche "wikilink") because of the
use of Near Eastern fabrics. For example, Pierre Yantorny's mules
designed for Rita de Acosta Lydig are made of an identical to other Near
Eastern footwear. She potentially wore these shoes with a harem dress,
further illustrating Eastern culture.[25]

## In popular culture

[thumb\|Manet's Olympia. The subject is wearing a pair of mules.
\|left](/File:Edouard_Manet_-_Olympia_-_Google_Art_Project_3.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb\|A marabou mule similar to Marilyn Monroe and other celebrities
worn in the 1950s\|200x200pxMules](/File:Marabou_Mule.jpg "wikilink")
have been associated with several celebrities. [Queen Henrietta
Maria](/Henrietta_Maria_of_France "wikilink"), wife of Charles I
famously wore an embroidered pair of mules in the 17th century.[26] In
[Ḗdouard Manet's](/Édouard_Manet "wikilink") 1863 painting
*[Olympia,](/Olympia_(Manet) "wikilink")* the central woman wears mules
in bed. Her shoes connect to a type of slipper (chausson), which was
slang for "old prostitute".[27] During the 1950s, iconic actresses like
[Marilyn Monroe](/Marilyn_Monroe "wikilink"), [Joan
Fontaine](/Joan_Fontaine "wikilink"), and [Jayne
Russel](/Jane_Russell "wikilink") wore the marabou mules in their films
and daily lives. For example, Marilyn Monroe wore them in [The Seven
Year Itch](/The_Seven_Year_Itch "wikilink").[28] [Carrie
Bradshaw](/Carrie_Bradshaw "wikilink") from [Sex and the
City](/Sex_and_the_City "wikilink") frequently wore mules. In [Marie
Claire](/Marie_Claire "wikilink")'s list of the top 32 Carrie Bradshaw
shoes, six pairs are mules.[29] In 2017, many celebrities and models
were sighted wearing versions of the mules. [Gigi
Hadid](/Gigi_Hadid "wikilink") designed a mule for [Stuart
Weitzman](/Stuart_Weitzman "wikilink")'s spring 2017 collection.[30]
[Beyoncé](/Beyoncé "wikilink")'s instagram post of her wearing
[Givenchy](/Givenchy "wikilink") mules received 2,222,727 likes.[31]
[Gucci](/Gucci "wikilink")'s Princetown loafer is a version of a mule
worn by both men and women. In 2015, a version of this shoe was lined
with kangaroo fur, which stirred anti fur activists. These shoes were
snapped on celebrities' social media platforms from [Marc
Jacobs](/Marc_Jacobs "wikilink") to [Leandra
Medine](/Leandra_Medine "wikilink") of Man Repeller.[32] The mule has
taken up a strong spot in popular culture as seen in their presence in
films, paintings, and the streets.

## Gallery

<File:Mules> MET DP108284.jpg\|Early 17th century mule <File:Mules> MET
1978.356ab F.jpg\|1750 Mules made of silk <File:18th> century shoes
mules.jpg\|18th century mules <File:Mules-shoes-2.jpg%7CRed> and animal
skin high heeled mules <File:Mules> loafers brown-blue
low-heel.jpg\|Woman's loafer style mules with a flat heel <File:Mules>
maryjane black wedge-heel.jpg\|Woman's Maryjane style mules with a wedge
heel <File:Mule-shoe-window-b.jpg%7CVarious> styles of mules in a shop
window <File:Birkenstock> filttofflor 2007 03 24-2.JPG\|Birkenstock
mules <File:Clog> mule.jpg\|High heeled and studded mule

## See also

## References

[Category:Shoes](/Category:Shoes "wikilink")

[1]

[2] Definition of mule in
English\|last=\|first=\|date=\|website=En.oxforddictionaries.com\|archive-url=\|archive-date=\|access-date=}}

[3] Rexford, Nancy. Womens Shoes in America, 1795–1830. Kent: Kent State
University Press, 2000.

[4]

[5]

[6] Stevens, Sarah C., and Margaret T. Ordoñez. "Fashionable and Work
Shoes from a Nineteenth-Century Boston Privy." Historical Archaeology
39, no. 4 (2005): 9–25. .

[7] Blahnik,
Manolo\|last=\|first=\|date=\|website=Collections.van.ac.uk\|archive-url=\|archive-date=\|access-date=}}

[8]

[9] Walford, Jonathan. "[Shoes,
Women's](https://www.bloomsburyfashioncentral.com/products/berg-fashion-library/encyclopedia/the-berg-companion-to-fashion/shoes-womens)."
In The Berg Companion to Fashion, edited by Valerie Steele. Oxford:
Bloomsbury Academic, 2010. Accessed October 30, 2017.

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13] Swann, June. Shoes. London: B.T Batsford, 1991.

[14]

[15] Weber, Eugen. "Review: *Fashion under the Occupation* by Dominique
Veillon, Miriam Kochan." The English Historical Review, vol. 118, no.
477, 2003, pp. 841–842.

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24] 1\. Jain-Neubauer, Jutta. "South Asian Footwear: History,
Tradition, and contemporary Trends." In Berg Encyclopedia of World Dress
and Fashion: South Asia and Southeast Asia, edited by Jasleen Dhamija,
177–182. Oxford: Bloomsbury Academic, 2010. Accessed October 30, 2017. .

[25]

[26]

[27] Dolan, Therese. "Fringe Benefits: Manet's Olympia and Her Shawl"
The Art Bulletin, 97:4, 2015 409–429.

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]