---
title: Over-the-knee boots
permalink: /Over-the-knee_boots/
---

**Over-the-knee boots** (or cuissardes, which include thighboots, top
boots, hip-boots, and waders), *OTK boots*, are long boots that fully or
partly cover the knee. Originally created as a man's riding boot in the
15th century, in the latter part of the 20th century, the style was
redefined as a fashion boot for women. Over-the-knee boots are also used
as a work boot in circumstances requiring additional protection for the
legs (e.g. fishing waders).



## Womenswear

The earliest examples of women wearing over-the-knee boots come from the
traditional principal boy role in pantomime theater, in which the young
male protagonist of the play is played by a young actress in boys'
clothes. These breeches roles were also a rare opportunity for an early
20th century actress to wear a revealing costume, potentially increasing
the size of the audience. When playing historical characters such as
Dick Whittington, the principal boy would often wear over-the-knee boots
as part of her costume, emphasizing her swashbuckling, heroic character.

The adoption of over-the-knee boots as a fashion item for women began in
the early 1960s. In 1962, Balenciaga's fall collection featured a tall
boot by Mancini that just covered the knee and the following year, Yves
Saint Laurent's couture collection included thigh-length alligator skin
boots by designer Roger Vivier. These were based on a design originally
produced by Vivier for the dancer Rudolf Nureyev in the ballet Swan
Lake. The adaptation of hyper-masculine boots as fashion footwear for
women has been interpreted as part of a broader 1960s trend against the
femininity of Dior's post-war "New Look".

Rising hemlines and the availability of new, brightly colored artificial
materials such as PVC, combined to make boots an attractive fashion
option for younger women. As skirts became even shorter in the late
1960s, there was a resurgence of interest in thigh-length boots or
cuissardes. Pierre Cardin featured shiny black PVC thighboots as part of
his futuristic 1968 couture collection and Beth Levine designed
seamless, stretch vinyl and nylon stocking boots tall enough to do
double duty as hosiery. The tallest boots from this period were so high
that they were equipped with suspenders to hold them up.

Over the next three decades, the popularity of over-the-knee boots as a
fashion item for women waxed and waned. In the early 1970s, the
multi-colored suede and canvas over-the-knee boots produced by the
London store Biba were so sought-after that queues would form outside
the store when a delivery was due. The end of the decade saw a
second-wave of over-the-knee and thigh-length boots; these were a longer
version of the stack-heeled knee-length boots popular in the late 1970s
and were usually worn over jeans. In the late 1980s, over-the-knee boots
made a reappearance; these were loose-fitting, low-heeled styles in
suede, often brightly colored or decorated with brocade. By 1990, Karl
Lagerfeld had included thigh-length satin boots in his Fall/Winter
Couture collection for Chanel, using the boots as an alternative to
leggings; there was a brief vogue for thigh-length "riding boots‚Äù in the
early 1990s and over-the-knee styles were intermittently popular
throughout the first decade of the 21st century. In 2009, thigh-length
boots were a subject of major attention by the fashion press, receiving
guarded approval and a level of mainstream acceptance that they had
never previously achieved; this trend continued in 2010 and by the
following year, over-the-knee styles had become commonplace.

Thigh-high boots are more flattering on women with longer legs: "The
shorter you are, the less leg there is above the top of the boot, when
wearing footwear that ends above the knee. A very high heel helps to
give the illusion of height, but when there is much more boot visible
than leg; the effect is to optically foreshorten you.

## Workwear

Hip boots (sometimes colloquially called "waders"), are a type of boot
worn by river fishermen. Hip boots are typically made out of rubber, and
cover the legs to the tops of the thighs or to the waist. They are
designed to protect the fisherman when wading into deeper waters and
keep the feet and legs warm in autumn and winter. Hip boots are also
worn by ecologists and environmental scientists who do tests in swamps
or lakes to determine the quality of water.

In contrast to hip boots, waders are waterproof boots that extend from
the foot to the chest. Waders are available with boots attached or can
have attached stocking feet (usually made of the wader material), to
wear inside shorter boots. In addition to being used for leisure
purposes, such as angling or waterfowl hunting, industrial, heavy-duty
waders are used as protective clothing in the chemical industry,
agriculture and in the maintenance of water supply, sewerage and other
utilities.