---
title: Riding boots
permalink: /Riding_boots/
---

A **riding boot** is a boot made to be used for horse riding. The
classic boot comes high enough up the leg to prevent the leathers of the
saddle from pinching the leg of the rider, has a sturdy toe to protect
the rider's foot when on the ground and has a distinct heel to prevent
the foot from sliding through the stirrup. The sole is smooth or lightly
textured to avoid being caught on the tread of the stirrup in the event
of a fall.

The modern riding boot is relatively low-heeled, with a heel of less
than one inch, though historically a higher heel was common, as it has
always been critically important for riding boots to prevent the foot
from slipping through the stirrup. Today, only some styles of cowboy
boot retain a higher heel than other modern riding boots.

## Materials

Traditionally, English riding boots are made of smooth leather, usually
cowhide, or occasionally pigskin, and most show boots remain thus due to
the classic look. However, synthetic leather, vinyl and other materials
are becoming more common. Quality of leather varies, with softer,
finer-quality increasing the value of the boot. For formal wear, patent
leather is occasionally seen, particularly in jodhpur boots designed for
saddle seat horse show classes held after 6:00 pm, when formal attire
may be worn in certain types of competition.

For casual riding, riders often wear well-worn show boots, but also may
take advantage of new boot designs modeled after the athletic shoe or
hiking boot that have been created, using space age synthetics and
breathable materials to create what essentially is a "tennis shoe with a
heel [Category:Footwear](/Category:Footwear "wikilink")
[Category:Boots](/Category:Boots "wikilink")