---
title: Rocker bottom shoe
permalink: /Rocker_bottom_shoe/
---

A **rocker sole shoe** or **rocker bottom shoe** is a
[shoe](/shoe "wikilink") which has a thicker-than-normal sole with
rounded heel. Such shoes ensure the wearer does not have flat footing
along the proximal-distal axis of the foot. The shoes are generically
known by a variety of names including **round bottom shoes**,[1]
**round**/**ed sole shoes**,[2] and **toning shoes**,[3] but also by
various brand names.[4] Tyrell & Carter identified at least six standard
variations of the rocker sole shoe and named them: *toe-only rocker*,
*rocker bar*, *mild rocker*, *heel-to-toe rocker*, *negative heel
rocker* and *double rocker*.[5]

Rocker soles may replace regular soles on any style of footwear. Some
rocker bottom shoes are purpose built to reduce the function or replace
the lost function of a joint. For example, a person with a [hallux
rigidus](/hallux_rigidus "wikilink") (stiff big toe) may use a rocker
bottom shoe to replace the flexion lost at the metatarsal joint. Rocker
bottom shoes are also used to compensate for the lost range of motion,
however caused, at the [tibiotalar joint](/tibiotalar_joint "wikilink")
(ankle joint). In such cases, the wearer maintains solid and stable
footing while standing, but the rock of the heel assists with the
propulsive phase of gait, making walking more natural and less painful
to the affected joints. Beneficiaries of this type of sole modification
include people suffering from arthritis or any other disorder or injury
causing pain and/or loss of motion in foot joints.

The construction of most varieties of rocker sole shoes mean that the
wearer's body weight is shifted behind the ankle and the wearer is
required to do more work than would be required in flat-soled shoe to
find their center of gravity and remain balanced.[6]

In the 2000s, a heel-to-toe rocker sole shoe for the sports footwear
market was popularized by brands such as *MBT*, *Shape Ups* and
*EasyTone*.[7]

## History

Rocker sole shoes have been referenced in publications as early as
1990.[8]

Branded generic rocker sole shoes were popularized for the mass market
in the late 1990s and 2000s by the Swiss Masai company as *Masai
Barefoot Technology* or *MBT*.[9][10] According to Swiss Masai, the
market concept originated with engineer and former athlete [Karl
Müller](/Karl_Müller_(inventor) "wikilink") who intended they would
"simulate the challenge of walking barefoot on soft earth".[11][12]
Various other sports footwear companies followed suit with their own
branded versions of the heel-to-toe rocker targeted at the exercise
equipment market.[13] A news report estimated that 200,000 pairs of
modern heel-to-toe rocker sole shoes were sold in the US in 2005.[14]

## Therapeutic claims and responses

Proponents of modern heel-to-toe rocker sole shoes claim that because
the foot of the wearer is slightly destabilised, certain lesser-worked
muscle groups in the leg, such as the core and gluteus, are challenged
more than they are normally. As such they are purported to derive health
benefits for the wearer, such as improved posture and tighter
muscles.[15][16]

The [NICE guidelines](/NICE_guidelines "wikilink") in the UK state that
healthcare professionals should not offer rocker-bottom shoes as a
treatment for people with lower back pain or sciatica.[17] No studies
found significant health benefits in the short- or long-term, and
several found significant harms in terms of worsened anxiety and
depression among people who had lower back pain.[18] One study found
that flat-bottomed shoes may be better for people whose lower back pain
is aggravated by walking or standing.[19]

Rocker-bottom shoes do not increase muscle use in the legs or burn more
calories.[20] A 2010 [University of
Wisconsin](/University_of_Wisconsin "wikilink") study commissioned by
the [American Council on
Exercise](/American_Council_on_Exercise "wikilink") compared exercise
wearing rocker bottom shoes and regular running shoes. The study found
there was no fitness benefit to wearing rocker sole shoes.[21] The study
was cited in a 2011 class-action lawsuits alleging false advertising by
New Balance, Reebok, and other manufacturers.[22]

A 2009 study raised concern that use of rocker sole shoes may increase
the risk of falls.[23] While research by Wang (2009) indicates that this
may not be a problem in able-bodied individuals, it has been
demonstrated to be a concern in older individuals who experience balance
problems.[24]

## Notes

## References

1.

2.

3.

4.

[Category:Shoes](/Category:Shoes "wikilink") [Category:Exercise
equipment](/Category:Exercise_equipment "wikilink")

[1] Tyrell & Carter (2008) page 134.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]