---
title: Slide (footwear)
permalink: /Slide_(footwear)/
---

[thumb\|right\|A pair of [Adidas](Adidas "wikilink") Duranomo slides,
popular to wear with socks](/File:Adidas_Sliders.jpg "wikilink")

A **slider** is a form of footwear. They are backless and open-toed,
essentially an open-toed [mule](/Mule_(shoe) "wikilink"). Slides can be
high-heeled, flat-heeled or somewhere in between, and may cover nearly
the entire foot from ankle to toe, or may have only one or two narrow
straps. They usually include a single strap or a sequence of straps
across the toes and the lower half of the foot to hold the shoe on the
foot. The term is descriptive in that this shoe is easy to 'slide' on
and off the foot when the wearer wants to do so. Slides do not have a
“Y” shaped strap, like the flip flop. Slides are currently trending
because of the desire for a more comfortable shoe that still allows
participation in activities and sports.

## History

Slides can be traced back to Ancient Rome. Though they are often thought
to come from as far back as [Ancient Egypt](/Ancient_Egypt "wikilink")
or [Ancient Greece](/Ancient_Greece "wikilink"), there is a lack of
documentation to further prove that. The popularity of slides in the
United States started in the late 1960s, when vibrant, colorful
aesthetics, such as cheery flower motifs, were followed. Across the
world in [Germany](/Germany "wikilink") the brand
[Birkenstock](/Birkenstock "wikilink") created the first fitness slide,
a simple design made from contoured cork with a single buckled leather
strap. Another German company, [Adidas](/Adidas "wikilink") invented the
well-known Adilette pool slide.[1]

## Use

Slides are well known for their sporty look because of the impact
[Adidas](/Adidas "wikilink") has left. They are very functional so they
are great for casual outfits. For example going out to the beach,
walking in parks, summer barbecues. However, high fashion designers such
as [Prada](/Prada "wikilink"), Gucci, [Burberry](/Burberry "wikilink"),
and [Marc Jacobs](/Marc_Jacobs "wikilink") have included them in their
collection.[2] The different designs and ideas that come from the
designers are including everything imaginable. Things from feathers to
floral to faux fur and regal pearls are being attached or used as the
main design behind slides.[3]

## References

[Category:Sandals](/Category:Sandals "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]