---
title: Ugg boots
permalink: /Ugg_boots/
---

**Ugg boots** are a unisex style of sheepskin boot originating in
Australia and New Zealand. The boots are typically made of twin-faced
sheepskin with fleece on the inside, a tanned outer surface and a
synthetic sole. The term "ugg boots" originated in Australia, initially
for utilitarian footwear worn for warmth, and which were often worn by
surfers during the 1960s. In the 1970s, the boots were introduced to the
surf culture of the United Kingdom and the United States. Sheepskin
boots became a fashion trend in the U.S. in the late 1990s and as a
worldwide trend in the mid-2000s. In Australia, they are worn
predominantly as slippers and often associated with "daggy" fashion
sense and "bogan" culture.

Prior legal disputes between some manufacturers of sheepskin boots arose
as to distinguish whether "ugg" is a protected trademark, or a generic
term and thus ineligible for trademark protection. There are more than
70 registered trademarks that include the term "ugg" in various logos
and designs in Australia and New Zealand, as the term is considered a
generic reference to a type of shoe. Outside Australia and New Zealand,
UGG is a brand manufactured by the California-based Deckers Outdoor
Corporation, with most of its manufacturing based in China and with
registered trademarks in over 130 countries worldwide including the US,
UK, Canada, all European Union members, and China.

A noteworthy manufacturer in Australia and New Zealand is the Luda
Productions of Australia, which has roughly 75% of the market share in
Australia; EMU Australia; Euram Ugg; Blue Mountains Ugg Boots; Original
UGG Boots; Mortels Sheepskin Factory; Bearpaw; Uggs-N-Rugs; Binder
Corporation and Westhaven Industries. Deckers is the leading
manufacturer of the footwear style outside Australia. By 2010, worldwide
sales by Australian manufacturers combined equaled 5.9% of Deckers UGG
boots sales, with UGG dominating the world market.



## History

There are different claims to the origins of the ugg boot style.
Artisanal sheepskin boots were known in rural Australia during the
1920s, and were reportedly worn by shearers as they found them resistant
to wool yolk (Lanolin), which would rot their ordinary boots. However,
the date of commercial manufacturing began remains
unclear.<sup>\[*citation\ needed*\]</sup> The boots were reportedly
being manufactured in 1933 by Blue Mountains Ugg Boots of New South
Wales. Frank Mortel of Mortels Sheepskin Factory has stated that he
began manufacturing the boots in the late 1950s. Surfer Shane Stedman of
Australia has stated in interviews that he invented the ugg boot. Perth
sheepskin boot manufacturers Bruce and Bronwyn McDougall of Uggs-N-Rugs
have manufactured the boots since the late 1970s.

The origin of the term "ugg" is also unclear. Stedman registered the
trademark "UGH-BOOTS" in Australia in 1971, and in 1982 registered the
"UGH" trademark. Frank Mortel claims that he named his company's
sheepskin boots "ugg boots" in 1958 after his wife commented that the
first pair he made were "ugly." Some accounts have suggested that the
term grew out of earlier variations, such as the "fug boots" worn by
United Kingdom Royal Air Force pilots during World War I.

The 1970s saw the emergence of advertising using the UGG and UGH terms
both in trade names and as a generic term in Australia. The *Macquarie
Dictionary* of the Australian language first included a definition for
"ugg boot" as a generic term for sheepskin boots in its 1981 edition.
(After Stedman complained to the editors of Macquarie, a trademark
notation was added to subsequent editions indicating that "UGH" was a
trade mark).

In the 1970s, ugg boots became popular among competitive surfers. After
movie theatres in Sydney banned ugg boots and ripped jeans, the footwear
became somewhat popular in the youth market as a sign of rebellion.
Sheepskin footwear accounts for around 10 percent of footwear production
in Australia.

## Design

Traditional Australian ugg boots are made from sheepskins with fleece
attached. The fleece is tanned into the leather and the boot is
assembled with the fleece on the inside. Some ugg boots have a synthetic
sole, commonly made from Ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA). The stitching is
often prominent on the outside of the boot. The natural insulative
properties of sheepskin gives isothermal properties to the boots: the
thick fleecy fibres on the inner part of the boots wick moisture and
allow air to circulate, keeping the feet at body temperature and
allowing the boots to keep feet warm in cold weather and cool in hot
weather. Produced by a number of manufacturers, they come in a variety
of colours, including black, pink, blue, chestnut, and fuchsia. They are
available in both pull-on and lace-up varieties and their height can
range from just above the ankle to above the knee.

Some variations of ugg style boots have also been made from kangaroo fur
and leather. There are also synthetic boots. Although derided as "fake"
by some in the industry, their lower price made them appealing to large
retail chains such as Myer.

### Animal rights\[edit\]

Sheep-skin is a by-product of processing sheep for human consumption.
That is, sheep are not specifically killed for their skins. Because it
is a by-product, the supply of sheep-skin is limited by the number of
sheep processed for the meat industry. The rise in the popularity of
"UGG"-branded ugg boots has been the "driving force" in recent
shortages, which have seen sheep-skin prices from 2010 to 2012 increase
by up to 80%.

Being one of many clothing products made from animal skin, the
production of sheepskin boots has been the subject of criticism by the
animal rights movement with producers responding by improving animal
welfare. Animal rights groups call for the boycott of sheepskin boots
and their replacement with synthetic alternatives. In 2007, Pamela
Anderson, realizing that the boots were made of skin, called for a
boycott on her website. In February 2008, the Princeton Animal Welfare
Society staged a campus protest against the fur industry, particularly
attacking the sheepskin boot industry.
[Category:Boots](/Category:Boots "wikilink")
[Category:Footwear](/Category:Footwear "wikilink")