---
title: Winklepicker
permalink: /Winklepicker/
---

**Winklepickers**, or **winkle pickers**, are a style of shoe or boot
worn from the 1950s onward by British rock and roll fans. The feature
that gives both the boot and shoe their name is the very sharp and long
pointed toe, reminiscent of medieval footwear and approximately the same
as the long pointed toes on some women's high-fashion shoes and boots in
the 2000s.

The extremely pointed toe was called the *winkle picker* because in
England periwinkle snails, or winkles, are a popular seaside snack which
is eaten using a pin or other pointed object to extract the soft parts
out of the coiled shell carefully, hence the phrase: "to winkle
something out", and based on that, *winklepickers* became a humorous
name for shoes with a very pointed tip. Other countries had other
humorous names, e.g. in Norway and Sweden they were called
*myggjagere/myggjagare*, literally "Mosquito hunter". They are still
popular in the raggare and rockabilly subcultures. In some parts of the
U.S. they are called "roach stompers."



### Origins

Winklepicker shoes, inspired by the Poulaines worn by the medieval
French nobility, were a conspicuous contrast to the brothel creepers
worn by Teddy Boys. The male shoes were lace-up Oxford style with a low
heel and an exaggerated pointed toe. A Chelsea Boot style (elastic-sided
with a two-inch, and later as much as two-and-one-half-inch, Cuban heel)
was notably worn by the Beatles but although it had a pointed toe, was
not considered to be a winklepicker. Winklepicker shoes from Stan's of
Battersea were also worn by the Teddy Girls as well as being a fleeting
fashion for young women generally.

### 1960s

In the early 1960s, the winklepicker toe was popular with modernists,
the forerunners of the mods. In the early 1960s, the point was
effectively chopped off (they hung on for longer than that in the UK)
and gave rise to the "chisel toe" on the footwear of both genders.
However, winklepickers with traditional sharp-point styles made a
comeback of sorts in the late 1970s and early 1980s (either as
previously unworn old-stock, second-hand originals, or
contemporary-production attempted copies) and worn by several subculture
groups including mods, rockabillies, punks, rock'n'roll revivalists, and
in the goth scene, where they are known as "pikes".

Winklepickers with stiletto heels for women swept the UK in the late
1950s, and at one stage, the High Street versions were commonly worn by
a large part of the adult female populace of the UK. They were often
manufactured in Italy, but the handmade versions, notably those from
Stan's Shoes of Battersea, were the most extreme, if somewhat
bulky-looking at the toe compared with the Italian styles.

The original 1960s winklepicker stilettos were similar to the long,
pointed toe that has been fashionable on women's shoes and boots in
Europe of late. The long, sharp toe was always teamed with a stiletto
heel (or spike heel), which, as today, could be as low as one-and-a-half
inches or as high as five inches, though most were in the three- to
four-inch range. The stiletto heels on the original 1960s styles were,
however, much more curved in at the rear (also sometimes sharply waisted
and slightly flared out at the top piece) than most of the recent
pointy-toed fashion shoes, which often have straighter, thicker, more
set-back heels, rather at odds with the look of the pointed toe. In most
cases, too, the modern shoe toes lack the length of the true 1960s
winklepicker and bear more resemblance to the less pointed mass-produced
versions of the era.

They attained some notoriety, when they first appeared, as a result of
being worn in gang fights (sometimes by both sexes), although there is
some question as to the accuracy of contemporary newspaper accounts. In
fact, although the winklepicker looks lethal, it would be far more
likely for damage to be caused to the delicately pointed shoe than to
the opponent in any serious kicking incident.

### Modern day

By the middle of the first decade of the 21st century, winklepickers
were worn with 1960s mod blazers, Western shirts, vintage T shirts, and
skinny jeans by many indie pop bands and musicians, such as of Kings of
Leon, Kaiser Chiefs, The Kills, The Horrors, Jack White, Mod Fun, Neils
Children, Blanaid Montague, Klaxons, and Daniel Johns. The shoes are
closely related to British Garage Rock band The Horrors, who even went
as far as to have a winklepicker boot with three buckles on their
official merchandise t-shirt along with the words "I am a horror." Faris
Badwan has personally endorsed Paolo Vandini Veers. They are also worn
by English comedians Russell Brand and Noel Fielding and English DJ and
TV presenter Alex Zane.

Currently, winklepicker boots are very popular in Germany among the
modern Vogue Goth and Punk subcultures, who refer to the boots as
"pikes".

Although slightly pointed toes are often a feature of women's fashion
shoes, they are usually nowadays "tamed down" or shortened (often with a
sacrifice of comfortable toe space) for mass market appeal
[Category:Boots](/Category:Boots "wikilink")
[Category:Footwear](/Category:Footwear "wikilink")