![](Aran_cardigan.jpg "fig:Aran_cardigan.jpg") in the traditional white
*báinín* colour.\]\] The **Aran jumper**
([Irish](Irish_language "wikilink"): *Geansaí Árann*) is a style of
[jumper](Sweater "wikilink")[1] that takes its name from the [Aran
Islands](Aran_Islands "wikilink") off the west coast of Ireland.[2][3] A
traditional Aran Jumper usually is [off-white](off-white "wikilink") in
colour, with [cable patterns](Cable_knitting "wikilink") on the body and
sleeves. Originally the jumpers were [knitted](knitting "wikilink")
using unscoured [wool](wool "wikilink") that retained its natural oils
([lanolin](lanolin "wikilink")) which made the garments water-resistant
and meant they remained wearable even when wet.

Use of the word jumper (or other options such as
"[pullover](Sweater "wikilink")" and
"[jersey](jersey_(clothing) "wikilink")") is largely determined by the
regional version of English used.[4] In the case of Ireland, Britain and
Australia, "jumper" is the standard word, whereas "sweater" is mainly
found in tourist shops and in North America. The word used in Irish is
*geansaí*, a [Gaelicisation](Gaelicisation "wikilink") of
*[guernsey](guernsey_(clothing) "wikilink")* which has been
re-[Anglicised](anglicization "wikilink") to *gansey* in
[Hiberno-English](Hiberno-English "wikilink").

## Characteristics

Traditionally, an Aran jumper is made from undyed cream-coloured
*báinín* (pronounced "bawneen"), a yarn made from sheep's wool,
sometimes "black-sheep" wool. They were originally made with unwashed
wool that still contained natural sheep lanolin, making the garment
water-repellent.

The jumper usually features 4–6 texture patterns each of which is about
5–10 cm (2–4 in) in width, that move down the jumper in columns from top
to bottom. Usually, the patterns are symmetrical to a centre axis
extending down the centre of the front and back panel. The patterns also
usually extend down the sleeves as well. The same textured knitting is
also used to make socks, hats, vests, and skirts.

## History

There is debate about when island residents first started making the
jumpers. Some stitch patterns are believed, erroneously, to have a
traditional interpretation, often of religious significance. These
interpretations were fabricated by [Heinz Edgar
Kiewe](Heinz_Edgar_Kiewe "wikilink"), a yarn shop owner who noticed a
chance resemblance between Aran stitches and Celtic knotwork, and
assumed that Aran knitting was at least as old as, if not older than,
the knitwork it resembles. He wrote a book on his suppositions, *The
Sacred History of Knitting*,[5] which provides most of the mythology
surrounding the Aran jumper. His thesis has, however, been thoroughly
debunked by many historians of knitting, including [Richard
Rutt](Richard_Rutt "wikilink"), [Alice
Starmore](Alice_Starmore "wikilink") and Vawn Corrigan.[6]

Most historians agree[7] that far from being an ancient craft, Aran
knitting was invented as recently as the 1890s and early 1900s, when the
[Congested Districts
Board](Congested_Districts_Board_for_Ireland "wikilink") sought to
improve the fishing industry in the Islands. Fishermen and their wives
from other regions in the British Isles came to help train the islanders
in better fishing and fish-processing skills, bringing with them an
existing tradition of knitted [guernsey](Guernsey_(clothing) "wikilink")
jumpers. These [guernsey](Guernsey_(clothing) "wikilink") jumpers have
similar stitch patterns, though usually only on the yoke, and are worked
in fine wool not available to the Aran Islanders. Enterprising local
women began knitting their own version, using thicker local wool,
all-over patterning, and different construction such as saddle
shoulders, rather than the more usual gusseted drop sleeve. Vawn
Corrigan dates the adult Aran gansey as we know it today to 1932 when
the first one was commissioned by social reformer [Muriel
Gahan](Muriel_Gahan "wikilink").[8]

The first commercially available Aran knitting patterns were published
in the 1940s by Patons of England.
[*Vogue*](Vogue_(magazine) "wikilink") magazine carried articles on the
garment in the 1950s, and jumper exports from the west of Ireland to the
United States began in the early 1950s. Standun in Spiddal, Co.Galway
was the first to export the Aran sweater to the USA. This provided
employment for women throughout Ireland. May & Mairtin Standun employed
over 700 knitters throughout the country and many people relied on them
as a source of income. The Standuns were great friends with The Clancy
Brothers and Luke Kelly, and they would often wear Aran sweaters from
Standun's.

The development of the export trade during the 1950s and 1960s took
place after [P. A. Ó Síocháin](P._A._Ó_Síocháin "wikilink") organised an
instructor, with the help of a grant from the [Congested Districts Board
for Ireland](Congested_Districts_Board_for_Ireland "wikilink"), to go to
the islands and teach the knitters how to make garments to standard
international sizings. He commissioned the Irish artist [Seán
Keating](Seán_Keating "wikilink"), who had spent much time on the
islands, to design and illustrate marketing brochures. Knitting became
an important part of the islands' economy. Adding to the popularity of
the Aran jumpers were [The Clancy Brothers and Tommy
Makem](The_Clancy_Brothers "wikilink"), an Irish folk music group which
started recording in New York City in the late 1950s and who adopted the
Arans as their trademark on-stage garments. In the early 1960s they
appeared on *[The Ed Sullivan Show](The_Ed_Sullivan_Show "wikilink")*
and even in a special televised performance for US President [John F.
Kennedy](John_F._Kennedy "wikilink"). The national exposure and the
rising popularity of The Clancy Brothers and Tommy Makem fuelled the
demand for Aran jumpers even more. During the 1960s, even with all
available knitters recruited from the three islands and from other parts
of Ireland, Ó Síocháin had difficulty in fulfilling orders from around
the world.

### Myths

Part of the appeal and popularity of Aran Jumper comes from the array of
myths propagated by [Heinz Edgar Kiewe](Heinz_Edgar_Kiewe "wikilink"):

1.  The moss stitch is said to signify an abundance of growth.
2.  The blackberry stitch represents nature.
3.  The honeycomb is a said to be a lucky stitch, signifying plenty.
4.  Lattice or basket stitches to represent the old wicker basket
    patterns.
5.  The Ladder of Life and Tree of Life represent the stages of life.

It is sometimes said that each islander (or his family) had a jumper
with a unique design, so that if he drowned and was found, maybe weeks
later, on the beach, his body could be identified.[9] This misconception
may have originated with [John Millington
Synge](John_Millington_Synge "wikilink")'s 1904 play *Riders to the
Sea*, in which the body of a dead Islander is identified by his
hand-knitted socks. However, even in the play, there is no reference to
any decorative or Aran-type pattern. The socks are identified by the
number of stitches, the quote being "it's the second one of the third
pair I knitted, and I put up three score stitches, and I dropped four of
them".

## Aran production today

![](Green_Aran_Sweater.JPG "fig:Green_Aran_Sweater.JPG") While in the
past, the majority of jumpers and other Aran garments were knitted by
hand, today the majority of items for sale in Ireland and elsewhere are
either machine knitted or produced on a hand [loom](loom "wikilink").
There are very few people still knitting jumpers by hand on a commercial
basis but hand knitted jumpers are still available at local craft
initiatives.

Machine knitted jumpers tend to use finer wool, cotton, or synthetic
yarn and have less complex patterns, since many of the traditional
stitches cannot be reproduced this way. They are generally flatter,
lighter and less substantial, without the pronounced texture of a hand
knitted or hand loomed jumper. Machine knitted jumpers will loosen with
wear, and so it is advisable to buy one size smaller than the size of
the sweater usually worn.[10] They are the least expensive option.
Hand-looming allows more complicated stitches to be used, will have
fewer stitches to the inch and be thicker. The best quality hand-loomed
jumpers are almost indistinguishable from hand knit. Hand knitted
jumpers tend to be more tightly knitted, to have more complex stitch
patterns and to be longer-lasting and they attract a significant price
premium. By holding them up to light, the difference between the machine
knit and hand knit is evident.

## See also

-   [Aran knitting patterns](Aran_knitting_patterns "wikilink")

## References

## External links

[Category:Aran Islands](Category:Aran_Islands "wikilink")
[Category:Irish clothing](Category:Irish_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Irish culture](Category:Irish_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Knitted garments](Category:Knitted_garments "wikilink")
[Category:Sweaters](Category:Sweaters "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]