![](Christmas_jumpers,_Sainsbury's_2016.jpg "fig:Christmas_jumpers,_Sainsbury's_2016.jpg")
A **Christmas jumper**, **Christmas [sweater](sweater "wikilink")**, or
colloquially **ugly Christmas sweater**, is often a top pulled over the
head to cover the torso, themed with a [Christmas](Christmas "wikilink")
or winter-style design. These clothing items are often knitted. A more
traditional approach is often a [roll neck](roll_neck "wikilink") (or
"turtleneck") top-pulled jumper.

## History

In the United Kingdom, Christmas jumpers became popular during the 1980s
after a variety of television presenters such as [Gyles
Brandreth](Gyles_Brandreth "wikilink") and [Timmy
Mallett](Timmy_Mallett "wikilink") began wearing them during the
Christmas holidays. In particular, their popularity may be attributed to
the influence of singers such as [Andy
Williams](Andy_Williams "wikilink") and [Val
Doonican](Val_Doonican "wikilink"), who appeared in these type of
jumpers in their television Christmas specials.[1] In Ireland, *[The
Late Late Show](The_Late_Late_Show_(Ireland) "wikilink")*'s host wears
an extravagant jumper for the Christmas *[Late Late Toy
Show](Late_Late_Toy_Show "wikilink")*.[2][3][4][5] They are often seen
as a hand-made present knitted by an elderly relative that are given as
a Christmas present.[6][7] During the 1990s and 2000s they were seen as
[gag gifts](gag_gift "wikilink") and fell out of favour[8] and featured
as something to be embarrassed of in the 2001 film *[Bridget Jones's
Diary](Bridget_Jones's_Diary_(film) "wikilink")*.[9] They gained
[camp](Camp_(style) "wikilink") appeal during the 2010s,[10] with online
retailer [Amazon](Amazon.com "wikilink") reporting an increase in sales
of 600% in 2011, and the trend has been followed by a number of
celebrities.[11] Ugly Christmas Sweater Contests are held annually in
the United States.[12]

In 2012, the British newspaper *[The Daily
Telegraph](The_Daily_Telegraph "wikilink")* described them as "this
season's must have",[13] with retailer [Topman](Topman "wikilink")
selling 34 different designs alone and reporting sales have increased
54% compared to 2011.[14] Higher end fashion labels have also produced
Christmas jumpers, including [Burberry](Burberry "wikilink") and [Jil
Sander](Jil_Sander "wikilink"),[15] and even
[metal](Metal_music "wikilink") band [Slayer](Slayer "wikilink")
released one as part of their merchandise range.[16]

The charity [Save the Children](Save_the_Children "wikilink") runs an
annual [Christmas Jumper Day](Christmas_Jumper_Day "wikilink") each year
in December using the slogan "Make the world better with a sweater". It
encourages people to raise money for the charity by wearing their
Christmas jumpers on a specific day.[17] *[The New York
Times](The_New_York_Times "wikilink")* reported in 2012 that a major
venue for sweater sales are independent company websites, with
ugly-sweater themed names.[18]

A survey conducted in 2012 showed that 41% of the British population
owned a Christmas-themed jumper, which increased to 50% within London
and Wales.[19]

## References

## External links

-

[Christmas Jumpers](http://www.christmasjumperstore.co.uk)

[Category:Sweaters](Category:Sweaters "wikilink") [Category:1980s
fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s fads and
trends](Category:2010s_fads_and_trends "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")
[Jumper](Category:Christmas_in_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")
[Jumper](Category:Christmas_traditions "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]