Cowichan}} ![](Cowichan_Sweater.jpg "fig:Cowichan_Sweater.jpg")
**Cowichan knitting** is a form of [knitting](knitting "wikilink")
characteristic of the [Cowichan](Cowichan_Tribes "wikilink") people of
southeastern [Vancouver Island](Vancouver_Island "wikilink"), [British
Columbia](British_Columbia "wikilink"). The distinctively patterned,
heavy-knit Cowichan sweaters, popular among British Columbians and
tourists, are produced using this method. Cowichan knitting is an
[acculturated](acculturation "wikilink") art form, a combination of
[European](Europe "wikilink") [textile
techniques](Textile_arts "wikilink") and
[Salish](Salishan_languages "wikilink") spinning and weaving methods.
From this union, new tools, techniques and designs developed over the
years.

Cowichan sweaters are also called **Siwash Sweaters,**[1] **Indian
Sweaters**, **Curling Sweaters** or sometimes **Mary Maxim Sweaters.**
While "Cowichan" is the name of a specific [First
Nations](First_Nations "wikilink") group, the word "siwash" is
[borrowed](loan_word "wikilink") from [Chinook
jargon](Chinook_jargon "wikilink"), the historic [trade
language](pigeon "wikilink") of the [Pacific
Northwest](Pacific_Northwest "wikilink"). It is derived from *sauvage*
() and is felt by some to contain derisive connotations.[2]

## History

### Pre-contact Cowichan weaving

Before European contact the [Coast Salish
peoples](Coast_Salish_peoples "wikilink"), including the Cowichan, wove
blankets, leggings, and [tumplines](tumpline "wikilink") out of
[mountain goat](mountain_goat "wikilink") wool, [dog
hair](Salish_Wool_Dog "wikilink"), and other fibres.[3] The wool was
spun with a [spindle and whorl](Spindle_(textiles) "wikilink"), and the
blankets were woven on a two-bar [loom](loom "wikilink"). There is
little information on pre-contact production and use of these weavings,
although examples remain in museum collections. No archaeological or
ethnographic evidence of [knitting](knitting "wikilink") or knitting
needles exists.

### Introduction to European knitting techniques

[Sheep](Domestic_sheep "wikilink") were introduced to [Vancouver
Island](Vancouver_Island "wikilink") in the 1850s,[4] providing a more
plentiful source of wool. Around the same time, the first European
settlers arrived in the [Cowichan Valley](Cowichan_Valley "wikilink").
Knitting by native women probably began in a number of ways shortly
thereafter. The most organized instruction in knitting was provided by
the [Sisters of St. Ann](Sisters_of_St._Ann "wikilink"), missionaries
who came from [Victoria](Victoria,_British_Columbia "wikilink") to the
Cowichan Valley in 1864 to start a school for the Indians.[5] They
taught the Cowichan women to knit such items as socks and mitts. The
mission has records of students' knitting and other domestic skills
being displayed at local fairs and at the [Chicago World's Fair in
1893](World's_Columbian_Exhibition "wikilink").[6]

After learning how to make socks and mitts, Cowichan women began to knit
knee-length underwear and sweaters. Like the other garments, sweaters
were and are today knit in the round with no seams, using multiple
needles in the European style of the period. The earliest Cowichan
sweaters were all of one colour, knitted with a
[turtle-neck](Polo_neck "wikilink"). Some knitters used a raised stitch
similar to that of a [gansey](Guernsey_(clothing) "wikilink"), possibly
inspired by the clothing of the many
[British](British_people "wikilink") fishermen who had settled in the
area.[7]

### Development of the Cowichan sweater

In time, Cowichan knitters began to embellish sweaters using the [Fair
Isle technique](Fair_Isle_(technique) "wikilink"). The teaching of
patterned sweater knitting is generally attributed to a settler from the
[Shetland Islands](Shetland "wikilink"), Jerimina Colvin.[8] Mrs. Colvin
settled in Cowichan Station in 1885, raised sheep, and hand-spun and
dyed her own wool. She probably began to teach knitting by the 1890s,
and added patterns as she learned them from other
[Scottish](Scottish_people "wikilink") settlers.[9]

Another origin theory is that the [Sisters of St.
Ann](Congregation_of_the_Sisters_of_St._Ann "wikilink"), a Roman
Catholic institution founded in Quebec to promote the education of rural
children, brought knitting to the West Coast. In 1858, four Sisters of
St. Ann traveled from Montreal to Victoria to open a schoolhouse for the
local children of all different races.[10] Knitting became part of the
instruction of Indigenous girls during the 1860s, both at St. Ann's
Academy in Victoria and St. Ann's School for Indian Girls in Duncan.[11]

Unlike Fair Isle or Shetland garments, however, Cowichan sweaters are
always hand knit of thick, handspun, one-ply natural-coloured
[yarn](yarn "wikilink") in two or three colours (generally cream, black
and grey), producing a warm bulky outer garment that is heavier than the
multi-coloured Scottish garments made from lightweight two-ply dyed
yarn. The classic Cowichan sweater of the 20th century was knitted of
white or undyed wool, in coat style, fastened at the front by buttons or
a zipper, hip-length, with a shawl collar, and usually ornamented with
indigenous or sporting motifs.[12]

## Techniques

![](Miekle_Cowichan_18.png "Miekle_Cowichan_18.png")

### Wool and its preparation

Because Cowichan knitting developed shortly after the introduction of
sheep to Vancouver Island, Cowichan sweaters have always been knitted
exclusively from sheep's wool.[13] Down breeds of sheep, such as
[Dorset](Dorset_(sheep) "wikilink"),
[Hampshire](Hampshire_sheep "wikilink") and
[Suffolk](Suffolk_(sheep) "wikilink"), thrive in the [coastal
climate](Oceanic_climate "wikilink"). Garments produced from the short
lofty fleece of these local breeds are characterized by their uneven
texture, their warmth and their lightness relative to overall bulk.[14]

The preparation of greasy wool demands several steps, and early
procedures have been modified over the years. The oldest wool processing
method followed by Cowichan women involved six basic steps: the wool was
washed, dried, hand teased, hand [carded](carding "wikilink"), drawn out
and loosely [spun](Spinning_(textiles) "wikilink") by hand to make a
[roving](roving "wikilink"), then tightened with a spindle and
whorl.[15] Today, many of these steps have been
[mechanized](Mechanization "wikilink") or eliminated. Some knitters
still buy shorn fleeces and go through most of the traditional
preparation, but most buy the washed and carded wool directly from a
commercial carding mill.[16]

![](Miekle_Cowichan_17.png "Miekle_Cowichan_17.png")

When the wool is obtained from fleeces, knitters remove the suint by
leaving them out in the rain to soften and then pulling the wool out.
Wool from any source must be washed in warm soapy water, rinsed a number
of times, and hung on lines or spread out to dry.[17] Yellowish wool is
left in the sun to bleach. Washing is done primarily during the warm
summer weather. Knitters hand-tease the dry wool to loosen and separate
the matted or tangled fibres by pulling them apart. This allows the
dirt, hay and twigs to fall out and makes the wool ready for
carding.[18]

### Spinning

Cowichan knitters spin wool three different ways: with a Salish spindle
and whorl, with a converted [sewing machine](sewing_machine "wikilink"),
and with a home-made spinning machine. The spindle and whorl are rarely
used today.[19]

There are five known types of Salish spindles.[20] The version used
exclusively by the Cowichan people was very large and was used for
spinning two ply mountain goat wool and dog hair for weaving. The
spindle was a tapered shaft approximately four feet long. The whorl,
which rested one-half to two-thirds of the way down the shaft, was about
eight inches in diameter. Coast Salish spindle whorls were often highly
decorated, and many fine examples can be found in museum
collections.[21]

Homemade spinning machines date from the 1890s.[22] There are two types
of Cowichan wheels: each has a foot [treadle](treadle "wikilink") and
[pulley](pulley "wikilink"), a flyer assembly with a large-sized
orifice, a substantial [bobbin](bobbin "wikilink") and flyer, and large,
widely spaced guide hooks.[23]

One type of wheel has the wooden flyer assembly mounted horizontally on
the table of a treadle sewing machine, and is rotated by means of the
foot treadle. The spinner's left hand draws out the wool to her side,
and the right hand guides the twisting yarn into the orifice. The second
wheel is completely homemade. It also uses a foot treadle, but the
spinner faces the spindle orifice instead of the side of the flyer, and
feeds the roving in directly. Today most of the spinning machines have
been motorized. The First Nations-designed spinner heads were copied by
manufacturers in the [United States](United_States "wikilink"),
[Canada](Canada "wikilink"), and [New Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink")
due to the renewed popularity of [crafts](craft "wikilink") in the
1960s. The specially adapted spinning wheels are now known as Bulky or
Indian Head spinners.[24]

### Knitting

Learning to knit sweaters and other items was - and remains - a family
process. Children often start by helping out with wool processing, and
begin to knit [mitts](Glove "wikilink") and [socks](sock "wikilink")
around the age of ten.[25] Today, as in the past, most knitting is [done
by women](Gender_role "wikilink"). Men often play a role by making or
repairing the spinners and carders, helping with the washing or carding
of the wool, and helping the women sell their works.[26]

Once the preliminary wool preparation steps are completed, knitting can
begin. Early materials for needles included [whale](whale "wikilink")
bone, [deer](deer "wikilink") bone, [telephone
wire](Telephone_line "wikilink"), [bamboo](bamboo "wikilink")
[chopsticks](chopsticks "wikilink"),[27] and wood. Today, knitters
primarily use readily available and inexpensive plastic or metal
needles. No matter which material is used for needles, the sizes vary
from 4-7.5mm depending on the weight of the hand spun yarn.[28]

![](Miekle_Cowichian_1.png "Miekle_Cowichian_1.png")

To produce a sweater, the knitter casts on stitches in the usual manner,
evenly divided onto at least eight double pointed needles. The number of
needles varies according to the size of the sweater, the weight of the
yarn, and the length of the needle.[29] There is one extra for the
knitting. For sweaters, the knitters always work in the round for a
pullover, or back and forth in one piece for a cardigan. After the
knitter has divided the stitches on the proper number of needles, she
knits a band of ribbing of her chosen design, then increases the number
of stitches and continues in stocking or plain stitch.[30] Pockets of
the knitter's design are often knit in.

Designs are incorporated in one of two ways. The simplest is a complete
change of colour for a whole row, used most often in the waistband, the
cuff, and the collar. Because there is now a variety of natural-coloured
wool for contrasting patterns, contemporary knitters no longer dye their
raw material.[31] The larger bands of design are created using the
two-colour or Fair Isle knitting technique, in which the unused colour
is carried along the back of the work between design units.[32]

Just before reaching the armholes, the knitter may add a few stitches
for extra room under the arms. At the armholes, the knitting is divided
into an equal number of stitches for the back and the front, and about
five stitches from the front and five from the back are put onto a
safety pin.[33] The knitter then divides the front in two by putting
four stitches from the middle on a safety pin to hold for the
[collar](Collar_(clothing) "wikilink") base. The back is worked straight
up from the armholes, and the fronts are worked to the same height with
some decreasing at the neck edge for shaping. The shoulders are knit
together, and the remaining stitches (usually about one-third) at the
neck back are held for the collar.[34]

Each knitter has her own method of making a shawl collar, using [garter
stitch](Basic_knitted_fabrics "wikilink"), basket stitch, or ribbing,
and knitting in one colour or incorporating stripes.[35] A common
technique is to pick up two of the four base stitches, start on one side
and work up the neck edge to the shoulder by picking up a stitch from
the lapel edge on each row and increasing the width of the collar as it
is worked.[36] The top ends in line with the shoulder seam. The same is
done for the other side. The knitter then picks up stitches from the
neck edge and knits back and forth, increasing on each row and picking
up stitches form the top of the lapel, then casts off the collar back.
Some skilled knitters are able to pick up stitches all around the
neckline and knit the collar all at one time by increasing and
decreasing for shaping.[37]

To knit the sleeves the knitter picks up the front half of the armhole
stitches on the safety pin, picks up stitches around the sleeve front
and sleeve back and then adds the back half of the held stitches.[38]
Sleeves are knit on three to five needles depending on the size of the
garment. The shaping of the sleeve depends on the needle sizes and the
designs. Knitters decrease as needed, mostly in the elbow area and cutt,
and cast off at the wrist. Knitting down the sleeve, rather than
attaching on a separate sleeve, produces a better fitting garment.[39]
It also easily enables a sleeve to be lengthened or a cuff repaired. The
actual knitting process usually takes two to three days.[40]

Over the years Cowichan knitters have produced a variety of items in
addition to their sweaters. They have responded to market demands by
making socks and mitts, and more recently [tuques](tuque "wikilink"),
[tams](Tam_(cap) "wikilink"), [ponchos](poncho "wikilink"),
[slippers](slipper "wikilink"), and baby
[booties](Bootee "wikilink").[41]

## Design

Knitters probably began using [Fair
Isle](Fair_Isle_(technique) "wikilink") patterning in the early 1900s
(decade), contrasting shades and colours of wool.[42] As they now use
only natural colours, the range is limited to
[whites](white "wikilink"), [greys](grey "wikilink"),
[browns](brown "wikilink") and [blacks](black "wikilink"), or a
combination produced during the carding process. Most knitwear includes
only two or three colours. In sweaters, the colours form either
geometric or representational designs.[43] Characteristically they are
placed horizontally on the mid-portion of the body of the sweater. If
the design in this centre portion is geometric, it is laid out in a
broad band and repeated on the sleeves. If the main design is
representational, it is usually centred on the back, with the same
design on the front of a pullover, or two smaller versions of the same
representation on either side of the front on a cardigan. There are
usually geometric motif bands above and below the representational
figure, which are also repeated on the sleeves.

Most knitters collect designs, some of which are passed on through
families and friends.[44] Some families have proprietary designs,
although this is relatively rare.[45] Designs are incorporated only for
their artistic appeal; there is no meaning or implication to them.[46]
The popularity of Indian-patterned sweaters prompted the [Mary Maxim
Company](Mary_Maxim "wikilink"), then headquartered in [Sifton,
Manitoba](Sifton,_Manitoba "wikilink"), to produce graphed commercial
patterns, beginning in the 1940s.[47] Ironically, the knitters soon
began to collect and use these charts themselves. They continue to
retain favourite designs and to make modifications of them. There are,
for example, many variations on the eagle theme.[48] Knitters will also
create custom patterns, often with no traditional associations. Despite
the diversity of patterns, however, experienced knitters and dealers can
often identify the maker of a sweater through the particular qualities
of design and knitting style that form a kind of personal signature.[49]

## Spread in Popularity

By the 1920s, when interest in the sweaters came from outside the Coast
Salish community, both companies and private individuals began to
imitate the sweater.[50] One of the more famous imitations came from
[Mary Maxim](Mary_Maxim "wikilink"), a company that begun in the 1940s
by Willard S. McPhedrain. At first, Mary Maxim started as a woolen mill,
but the business soon expanded after McPhedrian traveled to British
Columbia on a sales trip and came across a Cowichan sweater.[51]

Today, companies such as [Pendleton Woolen
Mills](Pendleton_Woolen_Mills "wikilink"), [Ralph
Lauren](Ralph_Lauren "wikilink"),[52] and [Aritzia](Aritzia "wikilink")
all have their own version of the Cowichan sweater design. In October
2009, the [Hudson's Bay Company](Hudson's_Bay_Company "wikilink") (HBC)
revealed their clothing line for the [2010 Vancouver Winter
Olympics](2010_Winter_Olympics "wikilink"), including the Olympic
sweater that looked like a Cowichan design. [Chief Linda
Hwitsum](Chief_Linda_Hwitsum "wikilink"), the chief of the Cowichan
Tribes, called for redress from the HBC on October 21, 2009.[53] Because
of the sweater's registered trademark, the [Cowichan
Tribes](Cowichan_Tribes "wikilink") began seeking legal advice to
determine if it will launch legal action against HBC.[54] Meanwhile,
individual Cowichan knitters began to plan a silent protest where
demonstrators would wear Cowichan sweaters to the torch relays in
Victoria, B.C. and Duncan, B.C. that would take place on October 30 and
October 31 respectively. Eventually, a compromise was made between the
parties; knitters would have an opportunity to sell their sweaters at
the downtown Vancouver HBC store, alongside the imitations.[55]

## Footnotes

## References

-   Eells, Myron (1976). *Myron Eells and the Puget Sound Indians*. ed.
    by Robert H. Ruby and John A. Brown. Seattle: Superior Publishing
    Co.
-   Lane, Barbara (1951). "The Cowichan Knitting Industry".
    *Anthropology in British Columbia*. Victoria: British Columbia
    Provincial Museum, Vol. 2, 14-27.
-   Marr, Carolyn J (1979). *A History of Salish Weaving: The Effects of
    Culture Change on Textile Tradition*. Unpublished M.A. Thesis,
    University of Denver.
-   [Meikle, Margaret (1987). *Cowichan Indian Knitting*. University of
    British Columbia Museum of Anthropology Museum Note
    21](http://www.filefactory.com/file/a06h908/n/BOOK_highquality_pdf).
    .
-   Olsen, Sylvia (2010). *Working with Wool: A Coast Salish Legacy and
    the Cowichan Sweater*. Winlaw, BC: Sono Nis Press, 2010.
-   [Canadian Design
    Resource](http://www.canadiandesignresource.ca/officialgallery/?p=344)
    entry on siwash sweaters.
-   [Mary Maxim
    Sweater](http://wisehilda.blogspot.com/2008/08/more-vintage-goddness-mary-maxim.html)
    entry on "Wise Hilda Knits" blog.
-   [Siwash
    Sweater](http://www.canadianliving.com/crafts/knitting/knitted_reindeer_jackets_for_him_and_her.php)
    knitting pattern available for free download.

[Category:Canadian fashion](Category:Canadian_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Coast Salish
culture](Category:Coast_Salish_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Knitting](Category:Knitting "wikilink") [Category:Mid
Vancouver Island](Category:Mid_Vancouver_Island "wikilink")
[Category:Sweaters](Category:Sweaters "wikilink") [Category:Knitted
garments](Category:Knitted_garments "wikilink") [Category:Indigenous
textile art of the
Americas](Category:Indigenous_textile_art_of_the_Americas "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3] Meikle 1987, p. 3.

[4]

[5]

[6] Meikle 1987, p.4.

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12] <https://www.marymaxim.ca/indian-totem-pole-cardigan-pattern.html>

[13] Meikle 1987, p.7.

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17] Meikle 1987, p.8.

[18] Meikle 1987, p.9.

[19] Meikle 1987, p.10.

[20] Marr 1979, p.67.

[21] Meikle 1987, p.11.

[22] Eells 1976, p.41-42.

[23]

[24]

[25] Meikle 1987, p.13.

[26]

[27] Lane 1951, p.21.

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31] Meikle 1987, p.14.

[32]

[33] Meikle 1987, p.15.

[34]

[35]

[36] Meikle 1987, p.16.

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42] Meikle 1987, p.17.

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47] Meikle 1987, p.18.

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]