![](Gwa-jam.jpg "fig:Gwa-jam.jpg") **Gwa-jam** is a
[jumper](Jumper_(sweater) "wikilink") that is usually worn by members of
the same [major](Major_(academic) "wikilink") of [South
Korean](South_Korea "wikilink") universities.[1] There are differences
in phrases and colors depending on the major and university. In recent
years, there has been a point that it is promoting "academic attention"
because it sometimes carries a name of university student's high
school.[2] It is a fashion item for university students and plays a role
in belonging.[3] Most college students in Korea wear jumpers.

## History

In the 1860s, the [Harvard University](Harvard_University "wikilink")
[baseball team](baseball_team "wikilink") in the United States was
wearing jumpers of same design to show solidarity. The [university
apparel](university_apparel "wikilink") started when other students who
saw this were wearing jumpers of their design.[4] The reason why the
design of the universal 'gwa-jam' settles in the form of 'baseball
jumper' is closely related to this.

In Korea, since the 1980s, they have been making uniforms for the
purpose of creating a sense of identity within the department.
Especially when the [democratization
movement](Democratization_Movement "wikilink") in the 1980s peaked, the
consciousness of solidarity among the members was so high that they wore
uniforms. It was in the late 1990s that it began to be worn as a
so-called "Gwa-jam" baseball jumper. It started to wear at the Seoul
National University rugby club, and became popular with other athletic
and physical education students..

## Composition

The universal 'gwa-jam' is a baseball jumper made of artificial
[leather](leather "wikilink") and [melton](Melton_(cloth) "wikilink").
'gwa-jam' usually shows the name of the university, the
[major](Major_(academic) "wikilink") and the student number.

It rarely carries the name of his high school. The major is
distinguished by the color of the sleeve.

Universities, majors, and [clubs](club_(organization) "wikilink") are
slightly different, but the most common design is to put the [initial
capital letters](Capital_letters "wikilink") of the universities name on
the chest and the student number on the arm. Also, on the back side,
write down the name of the Universities in English or scholarly form,
then write down 'univ' below it, and write down the name of the major at
the bottom. The colors are usually matched in the universities symbol
color, but they are sometimes matched to the color of the members'
[symbols](symbol "wikilink"). In recent years, they have been drawing
universities flowers on their backs.[5]

## Fashion

Spring, the most common season for 'Gwa-jam', is sometimes called
'Gwa-jam season'.[6] 'Gwa-jam' is good to wear on any clothes and warm
in the spring weather. In recent years, even long padding for increased
warmth.[7] Likewise, the [university name](University "wikilink"),
major, and [student number](student_number "wikilink") are written. In
addition to ‘Gwa-jam’ and long padding shape, it also matches with
unique design.

'Gwa-jam', a fashion item, goes beyond clubs and clubs to meet clubs and
student council.[8] Even a small group like this they wear uniform
clothes for belonging feeling.

Recently, high school students also started wearing 'Gwa-jam'.[9] Like
universities, they are universally distributed, regardless of their
affiliation and singularity / engineering. Starting in 2015, new
students started to wear green 'Gwa-jam' at '[Shinil High
School](Shinil_High_School "wikilink")', an autonomous private high
school in [Gangbuk-gu](Gangbuk_District "wikilink"),
[Seoul](Seoul "wikilink"). Some students from the student council in
2014 began wearing the red "Gwa-jam" with the school name, and all the
students had the same 'Gwa-jam' when they responded well. The 'Gwa-jam'
culture, which is worn by university students, is spreading to foreign
high schools, independent high schools, and international high schools.
It is said that it started from the point of raising the pride of school
and strengthening the alliance between the alumni, but it is pointed out
that it may fall into 'collective superiority' from high school student.

## Awareness and evaluation

### Positive view

'Gwa-jam' is positively evaluated as a sign of belonging and
intimacy.[10] Kim Jae-hwi, a professor of psychology at [Chung-Ang
University](Chung-Ang_University "wikilink"), analyzes that 'Gwa-jam'
culture is an expression of identity, solidarity, and pride rather than
school pride, and a cheap and convenient fashion item. It can also be
related to the desire hierarchy theory of "Maslow theory". And that it
is the desire to be recognized and belonged to others by wearing
'Gwa-jam' because it is linked to the 'social desire', the third stage
of the desire hierarchy theory. In addition, Sungkyunkwan University
sociology professor analyzes that it is a natural phenomenon that arises
when he is proud of their school.[11]

### Negative view

Since the 2000s, there has been criticism that 'Gwa-jam' promotes
culturalism through cultural demonstration and distinction.[12] It is a
view that intellectuals who have to act with social consciousness
encourage the negative social phenomenon of degreeocracy. In
particularly, the prestigious 'Gwa-jam' has a relative deprivation
effect on those who do not have a bachelor's degree.[13]

## References

<references />

## External links

-

[Category:Sweaters](Category:Sweaters "wikilink") [Category:Education in
South Korea](Category:Education_in_South_Korea "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]