![](Jussipaita.svg "fig:Jussipaita.svg") The **jussishirt** () is a
traditional [Finnish](Finland "wikilink") [sweater](sweater "wikilink")
used specially in [Southern
Ostrobothnia](Southern_Ostrobothnia "wikilink"). The sweater is normally
grey and on the bodice there is a wine red diamond patterning.
[Jussi](Jussi "wikilink") is a [Finnish](Finnish_language "wikilink")
masculine given name.

The jussishirt is seen as a symbol of the
[Finnish](Finnish_language "wikilink") speaking
[Ostrobothnia](Ostrobothnia_(region) "wikilink") though its roots belong
to knitting history of the [Swedish](Swedish_language "wikilink")
speaking coast. There are several diverse theories about how the
jussishirt was born. The main theory is that it was developed from
traditional Ostrobothnian sweater in 1925 for a movie called
*"Pohjalaisia"*, which can be translated as "Ostrobothnians".

Nowadays, the jussishirt symbolizes the [stamina](endurance "wikilink"),
diligence, honesty, integrity and even the insanity and bravado of
Southern Ostrobothnia people. It has been made known by for example [The
Dudesons](The_Dudesons "wikilink"). Jussishirts are also mentioned in
the song "Pieni Hiace" by [Jope Ruonansuu](Jope_Ruonansuu "wikilink").

**Anttishirt** (Finnish: *anttipaita*), after Finnish masculine name
[Antti](Antti "wikilink"), is a shirt where wine red is replaced by
blue.

[Category:Sweaters](Category:Sweaters "wikilink") [Category:Finnish
clothing](Category:Finnish_clothing "wikilink")