![](Islandpullover_004.jpg "fig:Islandpullover_004.jpg")
![](Lopapeysa.jpg "fig:Lopapeysa.jpg")ic girls wearing traditionally
patterned lopapeysa sweaters.\]\] A **lopapeysa** (, from "lopa" = wool,
"peysa" = sweater) or **Icelandic sweater** is an
[Icelandic](Iceland "wikilink") style of [sweater](sweater "wikilink")
originating in early or mid-20th century, at a time when imports had
displaced older and more traditional Icelandic clothing and people began
to search for new ways to utilize the plentiful native wool. The design
has since become a national icon for Icelandic cultural identity.

## Terminology

*Lopapeysa* (plural *lopapeysur*) is a compound word, from *lopi*,
denoting the particular kind of unspun yarn traditionally used to make
*lopapeysur*, and *peysa* 'sweater, jumper, pullover'. Thus the word
literally means 'sweater made of lopi'.[1]

## Design of the sweater

It is characterized by a [yoke design](Yoke_(clothing) "wikilink") –
that is, a wide decorative circle surrounding the neck opening. The
sweater is [knitted](Knitting "wikilink") in a non-varying circle,
meaning that there is no difference between the front and the back,
unless a [zipper](zipper "wikilink") is added. The body of the sweater
is knitted using circular needles, while 'the sleeves are picked up onto
the needle containing the bodice. The shaping of the shoulders by
gradually casting off is incorporated into the pattern of the yoke'.[2]
The [yarn](yarn "wikilink") used, *[lopi](lopi "wikilink")*, is made
from the wool of [Icelandic sheep](Icelandic_sheep "wikilink") and
contains both wind hairs and fleece. Lopi is remarkable in that it is
not [spun](Spinning_(textiles) "wikilink"), so it contains more air than
spun yarn and as a consequence it has better
[insulation](Thermal_insulation "wikilink") properties. This also makes
lopi more difficult to handle than spun yarn, in particular for those
new to the material. Icelandic wool has earned an international
reputation for its warmth, lightness and insulation abilities so that
even when wet, it keeps you warm.[3]

The colors can be artificial, but undyed wool of various colors is
available and much in demand.[4] 'Originally, the sweater had a
patterned band of at least two colours at the hem, the wrist and the
yoke, forming the main pattern across the shoulders. During the 21st
century, this changed so that now it is common for only the yoke to be
patterned'.[5]

## The characteristics of the Icelandic wool

As a breed, the Iceland sheep is unique - the purity of the strain has
been protected by centuries of isolation and a total absence of contact
with others. By the same token, the wool it produces has no counterpart
anywhere. Evolving over 1,100 years of exposure to the sub-Arctic
climate, Icelandic wool has a distinctive combination of inner and outer
fibers. The outer fibers are long, glossy, tough and water resistant,
while the inner ones are fine, soft and insulating, providing a high
resistance to cold. A further striking characteristic of the Iceland
sheep is its natural colors, black, grey and brown as well as the usual
white. Together, these create the distinctive look of Icelandic
knitwear, one of the best-known examples of which is the lopi.

## History

Knitting probably came to Iceland in the sixteenth century, but the
*lopapeysa* originated in the early or mid-20th century, at a time when
imports had displaced older and more traditional Icelandic clothing,
industrial production was replacing hand-knitting, and people began to
search for new ways to utilize the plentiful native wool and knitting
skills. There is widespread speculation about the origins and
originators of the style (including suggestions of
[Greenlandic](Greenland "wikilink") women's costume,[6] or
[Aztec](Aztec "wikilink"), [Navajo](Navajo "wikilink"), [South
American](South_America "wikilink"), [Turkish](Turkey "wikilink") or
[Swedish](Sweden "wikilink") textile patterns,[7] and claims of original
design by [Auður Laxness](Auður_Laxness "wikilink")[8]), but the
consensus of academic work so far is that the style had a range of
foreign influences and no single originator.[9]

In the wake of Icelandic [full independence from
Denmark](Iceland#1944–present:_Republic_of_Iceland "wikilink") in 1944,
the *lopapeysa* increasingly became an [invented
tradition](invented_tradition "wikilink") and a symbol of national
identity. The *lopapeysa* has seen two main peaks in fashion: in the two
or three decades following Icelandic independence from Denmark in 1944
and in the wake of the [2008 Icelandic financial
crisis](2008_Icelandic_financial_crisis "wikilink") and the challenge to
Icelandic identity of globalisation. It and other goods inspired by it
are in the twenty-first century also widely marketed to tourists in the
country.[10][11]

## See also

-   [Mariusgenser](Mariusgenser "wikilink")
-   [Lusekofte](Lusekofte "wikilink")
-   [Selburose](Selburose "wikilink")
-   [Þjóðbúningurinn](Þjóðbúningurinn "wikilink") - Icelandic national
    costume
-   [Icelandic tail-cap](Icelandic_tail-cap "wikilink")
-   [Handknitting Association of Iceland](http://www.handknitted.is/)

## Sources

[12]

<references/>

[Category:Icelandic clothing](Category:Icelandic_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Knitted garments](Category:Knitted_garments "wikilink")
[Category:Sweaters](Category:Sweaters "wikilink")

[1] Guðrún Helgadóttir, 'Nation in a Sheep’s Coat: The Icelandic
Sweater', *FORMakademisk*, 4.2 (2011), 59--68 (p. 59),
<https://dx.doi.org/10.7577/formakademisk.201>.

[2] Guðrún Helgadóttir, 'Nation in a Sheep’s Coat: The Icelandic
Sweater', *FORMakademisk*, 4.2 (2011), 59--68 (p. 59),
<https://dx.doi.org/10.7577/formakademisk.201>.

[3]

[4]

[5] Guðrún Helgadóttir, 'Nation in a Sheep’s Coat: The Icelandic
Sweater', *FORMakademisk*, 4.2 (2011), 59--68 (p. 59),
<https://dx.doi.org/10.7577/formakademisk.201>.

[6] Handprjónasamband Íslands - Íslenska lopapeysan

[7] <http://www.woolandsheep.com/?q=is/node/68> Íslensk þjóðernishyggja
- Hin heilaga rolla!

[8]

[9] Guðrún Helgadóttir, 'Nation in a Sheep’s Coat: The Icelandic
Sweater', *FORMakademisk*, 4.2 (2011), 59--68 (pp. 63-64),
<https://dx.doi.org/10.7577/formakademisk.201>.

[10] Donlan, Kathleen, 'The Lopapeysa: A Vehicle to Explore the
Performance of Icelandic National Identity', Honors Thesis Collection,
335 (unpublished Honours thesis, Wellesley College, 2016),
<http://repository.wellesley.edu/thesiscollection/335>.

[11] Guðrún Helgadóttir, 'Nation in a Sheep’s Coat: The Icelandic
Sweater', *FORMakademisk*, 4.2 (2011), 59--68,
<https://dx.doi.org/10.7577/formakademisk.201>.

[12]