**Penguin sweaters**, also known as **penguin jumpers**,[1] are
[sweaters](sweater "wikilink") knitted for
[penguins](penguin "wikilink") that have been caught in [oil
slicks](oil_slick "wikilink").[2]

When an [oil spill](oil_spill "wikilink") affects penguins they have in
the past been sometimes dressed in knitted sweaters, supposedly to stop
them from poisoning themselves by ingesting the oil during
[preening](preening "wikilink"), and to keep them warm, since the
spilled oil destroys their natural oils.[3] The sweaters are removed and
discarded as soon as the penguins can be washed.

The project originated with the [Phillip Island Nature
Park](Phillip_Island_Nature_Park "wikilink") oil spill of January 2000
and was successfully completed, but the knitting pattern and call for
volunteers to donate remained available online. Instead of the 100 or so
sweaters needed, thousands were sent.[4] The extra sweaters were
stockpiled by the Tasmanian Conservation Trust.[5] As of 2014, the
Australia-based Penguin Foundation is still accepting handmade sweaters
but no longer uses these for penguin rehabilitation. Instead, these
sweaters are used to dress toy penguins which are then sold to raise
money for the foundation.[6][7]

After a [2011 oil spill in New Zealand](Rena_oil_spill "wikilink"), a
local yarn shop put out the call for penguin jumpers, and supplied a
pattern.[8] Jumpers were received from all over the world. However,
those cleaning and rehabilitating the penguins affected said they
neither used nor requested the jumpers: heat lamps were used to keep
cleaned penguins warm.[9] Once they are cleaned, there is little danger
of them ingesting oil when preening – one of the rationales given for
penguin sweaters – and sweaters may in fact do more harm than good to
the penguins.[10]

A penguin [wetsuit](wetsuit "wikilink") has been made for a penguin who
lost his feathers,[11][12] and similar garments are being made for
battery chicken rehabilitation.[13]

## References

## External links

-   [Lyrics](http://www.sentex.net/~gormorse/MoreBasicBlackLyrics.html)
    to the [James Gordon](James_Gordon_(Canadian_musician) "wikilink")
    song, *[Sweaters for Penguins](Sweaters_for_Penguins "wikilink")*

[Category:Oil spill remediation
technologies](Category:Oil_spill_remediation_technologies "wikilink")
[Category:Protective gear](Category:Protective_gear "wikilink")
[Category:Sweaters](Category:Sweaters "wikilink")
[Category:Penguins](Category:Penguins "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11] [BBC video](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7367227.stm)

[12]

[13]