![](Academic_dress_KCL.jpg "fig:Academic_dress_KCL.jpg") of [King's
College London](King's_College_London "wikilink"), designed by [Vivienne
Westwood](Vivienne_Westwood "wikilink")\]\] The **academic dress of the
United Kingdom and Ireland** has a long history and has influenced the
[academic dress](academic_dress "wikilink") of
[America](United_States "wikilink") and beyond. The academic square cap
was invented in the UK as well as the hood which developed from the lay
dress of the medieval period.

[Irish](Ireland "wikilink") academic dress is virtually the same as that
in the [United Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink") given the common
history and proximity of each other. Many other [Commonwealth
countries](Commonwealth_of_Nations "wikilink") also follow British cuts
and design of academic dress, most notably
[Australia](Australia "wikilink") and [New
Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink") though some are beginning to evolve
away from British cuts such as [Canada](Canada "wikilink") of which
[University of Toronto](University_of_Toronto "wikilink") has slowly
introduced American gowns that close at the front.

There is a distinction between different types of academic dress. Most
recently, gowns, hoods and caps are categorised into their shape and
patterns by what may be known as the [Groves classification
system](Groves_classification_system "wikilink"), which is based on
[Nicholas Groves](Nicholas_Groves "wikilink")'s document, *Hood and Gown
Patterns*.[1] This lists the various styles or patterns of academic
dress and assigns them a code or a Groves Classification Number. For
example, the Cambridge BA style gown is designated \[b2\] and a hood in
the Cambridge full-shape is designated \[f1\], etc. Because the
universities are free to design their own academicals using a wide range
of available gown, hood and cap patterns, colours and materials at their
and the robemaker's disposal, the academicals of two given universities
rarely clash with each other.

The [Burgon Society](Burgon_Society "wikilink") was founded in 2000 to
promote the study of academic dress.[2] It has publications and
activities to do with academic dress and published an updated version of
Shaw's book on British and Irish academical dress in 2012, with a second
volume covering non-degree awarding bodies published in 2014.[3][4]

## Gown

The modern gown is derived from the *roba* worn under the *cappa
clausa*, a garment resembling a long black cape. In early medieval
times, all students at the universities were in at least [minor
orders](minor_orders "wikilink"), and were required to wear the *cappa*
or other clerical dress, and restricted to clothes of black or other
dark colour.

![](OU-graduate.jpg "fig:OU-graduate.jpg"), MEd\]\] The gowns most
commonly worn, that of the clerical type gowns of [Bachelor of
Arts](Bachelor_of_Arts "wikilink") (BA) and [Master of
Arts](Master_of_Arts "wikilink") (MA), are substantially the same
throughout the English-speaking world. Both are traditionally made of
black cloth, (although occasionally the gown is dyed in one of the
university's colours) and have the material at the back of the gown
gathered into a yoke. The BA gown has bell-shaped sleeves, while the MA
gown has long sleeves closed at the end, with the arm passing through a
slit above the elbow.[5]

There are two types of yokes that are used for gowns. The more
traditional is the curved yoke, whilst the square or straight yoke is
used more in modern times.

Another type of gown is called the lay type gown, which is similar to
the MA gown in that it has long closed sleeves, but does not have a
yoke. Instead, there is a flap collar with the gathers underneath it.
Thus it is less voluminous than the clerical type gown. This gown is
often used for the dress of officers and graduates of some degrees
(especially at Oxford and Durham).

In the Commonwealth, gowns are worn open, while in the United States it
has become common for gowns to close at the front, as did the original
*roba*.

Some gowns may have 'strings' (i.e. grosgrain ribbons) attached to them
behind the lapels. These in the past were tied together to hold the gown
together but are now merely indicators of rank, such as in Cambridge
where strings indicate one is a graduate of the university (rather than
a graduate student whose undergraduate degree was awarded at a different
institution), or just for decoration.

### Dress and undress gowns

![](Cambridge_MusD_front.jpg "Cambridge_MusD_front.jpg")

Since medieval times, doctors, like [bishops](bishop "wikilink") and
[cardinals](cardinal_(Catholicism) "wikilink"), have been authorised to
wear garments of brighter colours such as scarlet, purple or red. In
many older universities, doctors have scarlet dress gowns or robes
(sometimes called "festal robes") which are worn on special occasions.
There are two distinctive shapes used in the UK for doctor's gown; the
Oxford doctor's shape and the Cambridge doctor's shape. The former has
bell-shaped sleeves, the latter has long open sleeves. Another rarer
form is the Cambridge MusD dress gown which is a pattern between the
two.

The other form of doctor's gown is the undress gown. This is a black
gown (which may or may not be distinct from the master's gown depending
on the university; if it is, it usually is trimmed with lace, braid or
other subtle indicators of rank) worn for less formal occasions such as
lectures. This type of gown is rarely seen or worn nowadays as many wear
the dress gown instead; there are fewer applications for the undress
gown in normal university life. However, the undress gown still plays a
part in the older universities where academic dress is usually worn. At
Cambridge, each doctor has its own undress gown, each trimmed
differently, meaning one can identify the degree of the wearer without
the hood (the same is also the case for bachelors and masters gowns at
Cambridge).[6] St Andrews prescribes a
[cassock](cassock "wikilink")-like gown with a row of buttons running
down the front, coloured according to the degree, and is meant to be
worn closed. This gown is worn as the undress gown for higher
doctorates, with a Cambridge-type gown for full dress. The two may be
worn together or separately.[7]

In the universities of the UK there are days called [scarlet
days](scarlet_day "wikilink") or [red letter
days](red_letter_day "wikilink"). On such days, doctors of the
university may wear their scarlet 'festal' or full dress gowns instead
of their undress ('black') gown. This is more significant for the
ancient universities such as Oxford and Cambridge where academic dress
is worn almost daily, the black undress gown being worn on normal
occasions as opposed to the bright red gowns. Since most universities
have abandoned academic dress to the graduation ceremony (where doctors
always wear scarlet), the significance of scarlet days has all but
disappeared.

### Undergraduate gowns

Undergraduates at many older universities also wear gowns;[8] the most
common essentially a smaller knee-length version of the BA gown, or the
Oxford Commoners gown which is sleeveless lay type gown and has two
streamers at the back at Oxford.[9] At Cambridge, most colleges have
their own distinctive design of gown.[10] This is also uniquely the case
at the oldest of the Ancient Scottish universities, the [University of
St Andrews](University_of_St_Andrews "wikilink"), where the
undergraduate gown is scarlet with a velveteen collar for most
undergraduates. Arts and Science students are members of The United
College and wear this red gown. Members of St Mary's College, which is
coterminous with the School of Divinity, wear the black gown with a
violet saltire cross on the left facing: with open sleeves for
undergraduates and with closed sleeves for postgraduates. B .[11]
Undergraduate gowns are seldom worn (even in institutions that prescribe
them) nowadays except in the older universities. Most new universities
do not prescribe them since academic dress has fallen out of daily use
so students would hardly, if ever, wear them. Some University College
Chapels use them as choir robes as an inexpensive attire which can be
seamlessly worn alongside clerical and postgraduate colleagues.

In the past, undergraduates wore gowns according to their rank; for
noblemen they wore coloured gowns with gold gimp lace, buttons and other
decorations whilst [fellow-commoners](fellow-commoner "wikilink"),
[gentleman-commoners](gentleman-commoner "wikilink"),
[scholars](scholar_(academia) "wikilink"),
[commoners](commoner_(academia) "wikilink"),
[pensioners](pensioner_(academia) "wikilink"),
[sizars](sizar "wikilink"), [battelers](batteler "wikilink") and
[servitors](servitor "wikilink") wore black gowns of decreasing
flamboyance based on their standing in the universities.[12]

## Habit

![](Cappa_clausa.jpg "fig:Cappa_clausa.jpg")\]\]

Another form of dress, now rarely seen, is the habit, which is worn over
a black gown. Only Oxford and Cambridge (though in theory Durham too)
use habits and mainly reserve their use for very formal ceremonial
occasions and to a specific group of academics or officials.

The [Convocation](Convocation "wikilink") habit used at Oxford is a
scarlet sleeveless garment worn over the black gown, with the sleeves of
the gown pulled through the armholes. It is similar to a bishop's
[chimere](chimere "wikilink") except that it is worn closed with two
large buttons. It is worn by doctors at meetings of Convocation or
[Congregation](congregation_(university) "wikilink") by those presenting
candidates for degrees.[13]

Even more rare and ancient is the *cappa clausa* or
[cope](cope "wikilink"), a large scarlet cloak with an ermine shoulder
piece worn by the Vice-Chancellor of Cambridge, or a deputy, when
admitting to degrees, and by anyone presenting new higher doctors or
[BDs](Bachelor_of_Divinity "wikilink") for admission to their
degrees.[14] The cope was once used by Vice-Chancellors of some
universities outside Cambridge in the past but the only other university
that still uses it is the [University of the
South](University_of_the_South "wikilink") in America).[15][16]

In Durham, the early statutes permit the wearing of a convocation habit
but 'under the gown' [17] though later statutes say 'with gown' instead
of under it. The Durham habit survives as part of the dress for the
Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor which are worn under their laced gowns.
There are two forms; one is sleeveless like the Oxford pattern and the
other is sleeved so more like a cassock than a habit. In theory, doctors
could wear the sleeveless type over their black undress gowns like in
Oxford but this is very rare as many do not know that they are entitled
to it.

Other habits that have fallen into disuse include the *cappa manicata*
which was the same as the Oxford habit except that it had two long
disused sleeves dangling behind and was used by lay doctors at
Cambridge, the *cappa nigra* which was a shorter version of the Oxford
habit worn by MAs, and the tabard which was similar to a BA gown.[18]

The Cambridge Proctors' ruff and the Oxford Proctors' tippet could also
be considered another version of a habit, a
[mantle](mantle_(clothing) "wikilink"), but the use of these are
restricted to said officials.

## Hood

![](Lampeter_BA.jpg "fig:Lampeter_BA.jpg") BA hood in Cambridge
full-shape \[f1\] \]\]

The hood was originally a functional garment, worn to shield the head
from the elements. In the English tradition, it has developed to an
often bright and decorative garment worn only on special occasions. It
is also worn by clergy and lay readers of the [Anglican
Communion](Anglican_Communion "wikilink") in choir dress, over the
[surplice](surplice "wikilink"), and it is common in cathedrals,
churches, and chapels for the choirmaster and/or members of the choir to
wear an academic hood to which they are entitled during services, over
their [cassock](cassock "wikilink") and [surplice](surplice "wikilink")
for the choir offices ([Morning](Morning_Prayer_(Anglican) "wikilink")
and [Evening Prayer](Evening_Prayer_(Anglican) "wikilink")).
Historically it may have been worn also at the
[Eucharist](Eucharist "wikilink") but this is generally considered
inappropriate today.

Hoods comprise two basic patterns: full shape or simple shape. The
traditional full-shape hood consists of a cape, [cowl](cowl "wikilink"),
and [liripipe](liripipe "wikilink"), as is used at Cambridge. At Oxford,
the bachelors' and masters' hoods use simple hoods that have lost their
cape and retain only the cowl and liripipe. Some universities only have
a cape and cowl and no liripipe or just consist a cape only; these are
classed separately under the Aberdeen shape style. Various other
universities have different shapes and patterns of hoods, in some cases
corresponding to the pattern current at the ancient universities at the
time when they were founded, and in others representing a completely new
design.[19]

The colour and [lining](lining_(sewing) "wikilink") of hoods in academic
dress represents the rank and/or faculty of the wearer.[20] In many
Commonwealth universities bachelors wear hoods edged or lined with white
rabbit fur, while masters wear hoods lined with coloured silk
(originally ermine or other expensive fur). Doctors' hoods are normally
made of scarlet cloth and lined with coloured silk.[21] Faculty colours
were introduced by the University of London and many universities
followed suit.[22]

The hood is nearly always worn with a gown though there are some
exceptions such as Oxford doctors who do not wear a hood with their
festal robes (though sadly this regulation is often ignored at
graduation ceremonies at other universities when Oxford doctors are
sitting in the faculty).

The neckband of the hood usually has a loop of which original function
is to hook onto the button of a cassock. Since many do not wear cassocks
for graduation, the loop is sometimes hooked onto a shirt button
instead. However, since the hood is rather heavy this has a tendency to
pull the lightweight shirt upwards. The correct way to wear the hood is
to allow the neckband to naturally hook itself onto the collar under the
tie which secures the hood in place. Sometimes, the hood is worn too
forward and down being hooked onto the jacket button or pinned which
causes the hood to sit poorly and be more likely to slip down the
shoulders like a shawl.

## Cap

![](Bishop_Andrewes_cap.JPG "fig:Bishop_Andrewes_cap.JPG")
[DDs](Doctor_of_Divinity "wikilink")\]\]
![](Sussex_pileus.jpg "fig:Sussex_pileus.jpg")
[pileus](pileus_(hat) "wikilink") of the [University of
Sussex](University_of_Sussex "wikilink")\]\] The [academic
cap](academic_cap "wikilink") or square, commonly known as the
mortarboard, has come to be symbolic of academia. In some universities
it can be worn by graduates and undergraduates alike. It is a flat
square hat with a tassel suspended from a button in the top center of
the board. Properly worn, the cap is parallel to the ground.

The mortarboard may also be referred to as a [trencher
cap](trencher_cap "wikilink") (or simply trencher). The
[tassel](tassel "wikilink") comprises a cluster of silk threads which
are fixed together and fastened by a button at one end, and fixed at the
centre of the headpiece. The loose strands are allowed to fall freely
over the board edge, typically falling over the left front side of the
cap. Often the strands are [plaited](Braid "wikilink") together to form
a cord with the end threads left untied.

There is a [mourning version of the square
cap](Academic_cap#Mourning_cap "wikilink") to mourn friends and family
relatives. Instead of a button and tassel, two wide ribbons are drawn
from corner to corner of the top board forming and 'X'. Where the
ribbons intersect a rosette of ribbon is attached. There could also be 9
ribbon 'butterflies' at the back part of the skull to indicate mourning
for the Sovereign, another member of the Royal Family, or the University
Chancellor.

In many universities, holders of doctorates wear a soft rounded
headpiece known as a [Tudor bonnet](Tudor_bonnet "wikilink") or
[tam](tam_(cap) "wikilink"), rather than a trencher. Other types of hats
used, especially in some universities in the UK, are the [John Knox
cap](John_Knox_cap "wikilink") (mostly at Scottish universities), the
[Bishop Andrewes cap](Bishop_Andrewes_cap "wikilink") (a reinvention of
the ancient form of the mortarboard, worn by Cambridge
[DDs](Doctor_of_Divinity "wikilink")) and the
[pileus](Pileus_(hat)#University_of_Sussex_pileus "wikilink") (at
Sussex). In some universities, such as Oxford, women may wear an Oxford
ladies' cap.[23]

For [Catholic](Catholic "wikilink") — and some
[Anglican](Anglican "wikilink") — clergy, the traditional black
[biretta](biretta "wikilink") may be worn in some circumstances instead
of the mortarboard. Those clerics who possess a doctorate wear the black
biretta with four ridges — instead of the usual three — and with piping
and pom of the color of the discipline, thus, e.g., emerald for canon
law, scarlet for sacred theology, etc.[24]

As with other forms of headgear, in the Commonwealth, academic caps are
not generally worn indoors by men (other than by the Chancellor or other
high officials), but are usually carried. In some graduation ceremonies
caps have been dispensed with for men, being issued only to women, who
do wear them indoors, or have been abandoned altogether. This has led to
[urban legends](urban_legend "wikilink") in a number of universities in
the United Kingdom and Ireland which have as a common theme that idea
that the wearing of the cap was abandoned in protest at the admission of
women to the university. This story is told at the [University of
Cambridge](University_of_Cambridge "wikilink"), [Durham
University](Durham_University "wikilink"), the [University of
Bristol](University_of_Bristol "wikilink"), the [University of St
Andrews](University_of_St_Andrews "wikilink") and [Trinity College,
Dublin](Trinity_College,_Dublin "wikilink") among others. Indeed
[Newcastle University](Newcastle_University "wikilink") shares a similar
legend as to why undergraduate academic dress do not contain a
mortarboard; it is stated that the first cohort of independent Newcastle
graduates from [Durham University](Durham_University "wikilink") threw
their hats into the River Tyne.[25]

The misinterpretation of some regulations has led to the confusion that
certain universities do not prescribe headwear, most notably the [Open
University](Open_University "wikilink") where the policy is that
academic headgear is not worn at graduation ceremonies, whilst some
universities have abandoned headwear for socio-political reasons or
because the designer intended it, such as is the case of [Vivienne
Westwood](Vivienne_Westwood "wikilink") and her design for [King's
College London](King's_College_London "wikilink").[26]

The [University of East Anglia](University_of_East_Anglia "wikilink") is
infamous for two new hats designed by [Cecil
Beaton](Cecil_Beaton "wikilink") that were prescribed. One is known as
the '[Dan Dare](Dan_Dare "wikilink")' or '[Mickey
Mouse](Mickey_Mouse "wikilink")' cap which is a skull cap with a narrow
rim around the top for bachelors; the other was known as the
[tricorn](tricorn "wikilink") or upside-down iron, which was basically a
mortarboard but with a triangle instead of a square for the top board
for masters. These caps were unpopular with students who preferred the
square cap and they soon fell into disuse. The tricorn is still used as
the official hat of the Registrar and the Dan Dare is still officially
prescribed for undergraduates; however, because undergraduate gowns are
extremely rarely, if ever, worn pressure for abolition of the cap has
not occurred.[27]

## Dress for university officials

![](Chris_Patten.jpg "fig:Chris_Patten.jpg"), Chancellor of the
[University of Oxford](University_of_Oxford "wikilink"), wearing his
official academic dress as the university chancellor\]\]
![](cam_degree_ceremony.jpg "fig:cam_degree_ceremony.jpg") wearing the
cope (*cappa clausa*), led by an [Esquire
Bedell](Esquire_Bedell "wikilink")\]\]

Officers of the universities generally wear distinctive and more
elaborate dress. The [Chancellor](Chancellor_(education) "wikilink") and
the [Vice-Chancellor](Vice-Chancellor "wikilink") may wear a black
damask lay type gown (sometimes with a long train) trimmed with gold or
silver [lace](lace "wikilink") and [frogs](frog_(fastening) "wikilink").
They wear a velvet mortarboard, similarly trimmed with gold braid and
tassel. This form of dress is not strictly 'academical' but it is
typical dress for those in high positions. Other than this gown, they
may have other distinct forms of dress, such as the scarlet *cappa
clausa* or [cope](cope "wikilink") worn in certain circumstances by the
Vice-Chancellor of Cambridge or his/her deputy and by higher doctors
presenting candidates for degrees, which was once worn by [Doctors of
Divinity](Doctor_of_Divinity "wikilink").[28] In the past, Chancellors
may also wear full court dress with breeches and court shoes like that
of the [Lord Chancellor](Lord_Chancellor "wikilink") of Great Britain.

Officers of lower rank may wear plain black lay type gowns, sometimes
with gold or silver trim, or ordinary gowns in university colours. In
general, officials do not wear hoods with their gowns.

[Marshals](Marshal "wikilink") and [bedels](bedel "wikilink") often wear
black lay-type gowns with [bands](bands_(neckwear) "wikilink") and a
black bonnet.

## British customs

At degree ceremonies, graduands often dress in the academic dress of the
degree they are about to be admitted to prior to the actual graduation
ceremony. This is not the case at several of the older universities in
the UK, most notably, Oxford, Cambridge and St Andrews which have their
own distinct traditions.

-   **Oxford:** Prior to admission to the degree, the graduand will
    normally wear either the undergraduate commoner's or scholar's gown
    (if being admitted to the BA), or the graduate student's gown or the
    gown and hood of their previous Oxford/external university degree
    (if being admitted to a higher degree). After being formally
    admitted during the ceremony, they exit the
    [Theatre](Sheldonian_Theatre "wikilink") and assume the gowns and
    hoods of their new degrees and then return to the Theatre in their
    new gowns and hoods. For certain degrees such as the higher
    doctorates and MAs, if they profess the Christian faith, the
    graduand may (if they wish) kneel in front of the (Vice-)Chancellor
    and be admitted in 'the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy
    Spirit' whilst being tapped on the head with the
    [Bible](Bible "wikilink").[29]
-   **Cambridge:** Prior to admission, undergraduates wear their College
    undergraduate gown with the hood of the highest degree they are
    about to receive, graduates with degrees from other universities
    wear the BA/MA status gown with the hood of the highest degree they
    are about to receive and graduates already possessing Cambridge
    degrees wear the gown and hood of the highest degree they currently
    possess. After the ceremony day, they would wear the correct gown
    and hood for their new degree. During the ceremony they would kneel
    in front of the Vice-Chancellor or their deputy (who always wears
    the cope) with the hands closed together whilst the VC encloses the
    graduand's hands between their own and admits them with a Latin
    formula.
-   **St Andrews:** Prior to admission, graduands wear only the gown of
    the degree they are about to be admitted to. During the ceremony,
    they kneel in front of the Chancellor or Vice-Chancellor who
    formally admits them by tapping them on the head with a folded round
    cap whilst the [bedellus](bedellus "wikilink") puts the hood of
    their new degree on them. Other ancient Scottish universities, like
    Aberdeen, where it is the sacrist who puts the hood on the graduate,
    follow a similar practice.

## See also

-   [Lambeth degree academic dress
    protocol](Lambeth_degree#Academic_dress "wikilink")

## References

[\*](Category:Academic_dress "wikilink")
[Category:Gowns](Category:Gowns "wikilink") [Category:Robes and
cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")
[Dress](Category:Academia_in_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink")

[1] The Burgon Society: [The Design of Academical
Dress](http://www.burgon.org.uk/design/groves.php) (6 May 2007)
Classification of Styles

[2] [Burgon Society:
Introduction](http://www.burgon.org.uk/society/index.php) (2 Nov 2008)

[3]

[4]

[5] Shaw (1995); pp. 4-7

[6]

[7]

[8] Hargreaves-Mawdsley, pp. 91-101, 128-135, 146, 148-149

[9]

[10]

[11] Hargreaves-Mawdsley, pp. 138-145

[12] William Gibson, *The Regulation of Undergraduate Academic Dress at
Oxford and Cambridge, 1660—1832*, The Burgon Society Annual 2004, pp.
26—41.

[13] *Burgon Transactions 2005* (2006); pp. 50-53

[14] [1](http://www.admin.cam.ac.uk/univ/so/pdfs/cso_4_ordinance02.171_217.pdf)
Statutes and Ordinances of the University of Cambridge, Chapter II.

[15] [Andrew Cusack: The 'New South' Scorns an Old
Mace](http://www.andrewcusack.com/2005/07/10/the-new-south-scorns-an-old-mace/)
Photo of Vice-Chancellor, Dr. McCrady, wearing a *cappa clausa*

[16] [Vice Chancellors of the University of the
South](http://about.sewanee.edu/vcannounce/history) Shows the various
VCs wearing copes.

[17] Fowler, Appendix VIII: "CONVOCATION HABIT: Scarlet cassimere, with
palatinate purple buttons, to be worn under the gown at all
Convocations."

[18] *Burgon Transactions 2005* (2006); pp. 42-58

[19] *Burgon Annual 2003* (2004); pp. 18–23

[20] Groves (2008), *Hood Key*

[21] Shaw (1995); p. 8

[22] *Burgon Transactions* vol. 5 (2006); pp. 80-89

[23] Goff; pp.22-23

[24] [Klerikale Kopfbedeckungen: Kopfbedeckungen
1](http://www.dieter-philippi.de/mydante_1479.html) (image heavy; 700+)

[25]

[26]

[27] Groves, Nick. *The Academical Dress of The University of East
Anglia*. pp. 11–12

[28] Shaw (1966); pp. 94-95

[29] Venables (1998)