**Buka**, or Boka, is the name for the cloak traditionally worn by
[Noongar](Noongar "wikilink") people, the
[Indigenous](Indigenous_Australians "wikilink") people of south-western
[Australia](Australia "wikilink").

Unlike in the south-east, where people such as [Yorta
Yorta](Yorta_Yorta_people "wikilink") wore [possum-skin
cloaks](possum-skin_cloak "wikilink"), the Noongars made use of the pelt
of the [kangaroo](kangaroo "wikilink").

While in the south east, there was a lot of sewing involved, there was
less involved in the south-west. It normally consisted of the whole skin
of two to three kangaroos sewn together, with the tail hanging at the
bottom of the cloak.

The cloak was worn over one shoulder and under the other. It was
fastened at the neck using a small piece of bone or wood. By wearing the
cloak this way it allowed for movement of both arms without any
restrictions and allowed for daily activities to be carried out with
ease.

Cloaks were reversible. They were worn the fur on the inside when
particularly cold and could be turned the other way when it was raining.
The cloaks were also used as rugs to sleep on at night.

Today many Aboriginal people have new cloaks and rugs made from kangaroo
skins. They are used in performances or often as they were traditionally
as a nice warm rug or cloak.

## See also

-   [Noongar](Noongar "wikilink")
-   [Possum-skin cloak](Possum-skin_cloak "wikilink")

## References

-   <https://web.archive.org/web/20140212072751/http://www.collectionsaustralia.net/nqr/fabri.php>

[Category:Indigenous Australian
culture](Category:Indigenous_Australian_culture "wikilink")
[Category:History of Western
Australia](Category:History_of_Western_Australia "wikilink")
[Category:Robes and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")
[Category:Noongar](Category:Noongar "wikilink") [Category:History of
Oceanian clothing](Category:History_of_Oceanian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Australian
inventions](Category:Australian_inventions "wikilink")