![](William_Laud.jpg "fig:William_Laud.jpg"), [William
Laud](William_Laud "wikilink"), wearing a black chimere over his white
[rochet](rochet "wikilink").\]\]

A **chimere** ( , or ) is a [garment](garment "wikilink") worn by
[Anglican](Anglican "wikilink") [bishops](bishop "wikilink") in [choir
dress](choir_dress "wikilink"), and, formally as part of [academic
dress](academic_dress "wikilink").[1]

A descendant of a riding cloak, the chimere resembles an [academic
gown](academic_dress "wikilink") but without sleeves, and is usually
made of scarlet or black cloth. In modern English use the garment is
worn as part of the ceremonial dress of Anglican bishops. It is a long
sleeveless gown of silk or satin, open down the front, gathered in at
the back between the shoulders, and with slits for the arms. It is worn
over the [rochet](rochet "wikilink"), colored either black or scarlet (a
combination referred to as "convocation robes").

## Ecclesiastical use

![](ConsecrationSparks.jpg "fig:ConsecrationSparks.jpg") bishops wearing
scarlet chimeres over rochets; in the background other bishops are in
[copes](cope "wikilink") and [mitres](mitre "wikilink")\]\] The chimere
is worn by the bishops of the [Anglican
Communion](Anglican_Communion "wikilink") as a component of their [choir
habit](choir_habit "wikilink"). It is traditionally coloured either
scarlet or black, although some bishops have innovated a purple chimere.
The wrist-bands of the bishop's [rochet](rochet "wikilink") typically
match the colour of the chimere.

For Anglican bishops, the chimere is part of their formal vesture in
choir dress — typically the chimere would be worn over a purple cassock
and the rochet and would be accompanied by a black scarf known as a
[tippet](tippet "wikilink"), with an optional [academic
hood](academic_regalia "wikilink"). The chimere may be worn when vested
in the [cope](cope "wikilink"), but not necessarily. Because of
[liturgical changes](Oxford_Movement "wikilink") in the later nineteenth
and twentieth centuries, it is no longer common for the chimere to be
worn when celebrating the [Eucharist](Eucharist "wikilink"), though the
practice is still kept up by some [low-church](low_church "wikilink")
bishops.

Traditionally, the red chimere was worn only by bishops holding the
degree of [Doctor of Divinity](Doctor_of_Divinity "wikilink") and the
black chimere by the others, arising from the academic history of the
garment. However, in recent times this distinction has not always been
followed.

On the analogy of the Catholic [mantelletta](mantelletta "wikilink")
certain Anglican prelates have from time to time appeared in purple
chimeres. An influential article on chimeres and their colours was
penned by the Rev. N. F. Robinson at the end of the 19th century. It
urged the retention of the garment, and especially the black chimere.[2]

In some churches the lead singer in the choir is permitted to wear a
chimere. It is a traditional part of the vestment of a
[verger](verger "wikilink").

## History

The word, from the Latin *chimera, chimaera* (Old French *chamarre*,
Modern Fr. *simarre*; Italian *zimarra*; cf. Spanish
*[zamarra](Zamarra_(coat) "wikilink")*, a sheepskin coat) possibly
derived ultimately from , *cheimérios* ('wintry'),[3] originally
referred to a winter overcoat (cf. the cognate mythological monster
[Chimaera](Chimera_(mythology) "wikilink")).

Its secular precursor was worn also by the [Roman
Senators](Roman_Senate "wikilink"), and is still worn by some university
professors.

The origin of the chimere has been the subject of much debate; but the
view that it is a modification of the [cope](cope "wikilink") is now
discarded, and it is practically proved to be derived from the medieval
[tabard](tabard "wikilink") (*tabardum, taberda* or *collobium*), an
upper garment worn in civil life by all classes of people both in
England and abroad. It has therefore a common origin with certain items
of [academic dress](academic_dress "wikilink").

The word chimere, which first appears in England in the 14th century,
was sometimes applied not only to the tabard worn over the rochet, but
to the sleeved cassock worn under it. Thus Archbishop [Richard le
Scrope](Richard_Scrope_(cleric) "wikilink") (+ 1405) is described as
wearing on his way to his execution a blue chimere with sleeves. But the
word properly applies to the sleeveless tabard which tended to
supersede, from the 15th century onwards, the inconvenient *cappa
clausa* (a long closed cloak with a slit in front for the arms) as the
out-of-doors upper garment of bishops. These chimeres, the colors of
which (murrey, scarlet, green, etc.) may possibly have denoted
academical rank, were part of the civil costume of prelates. Thus in the
inventory of Walter Skirlawe, [bishop of
Durham](bishop_of_Durham "wikilink") (1405–1406), eight chimeres of
various colors are mentioned, including two for riding (pro equitatura).
The chimere was, moreover, a cold weather garment. In summer its place
was taken by the [tippet](tippet "wikilink").

By a late abuse the sleeves of the rochet were, from motives of
convenience, sometimes attached to the chimere.

In the Anglican form for the consecration of bishops the newly
consecrated prelate, hitherto vested in rochet, is directed to put on
the rest of the episcopal habit, i.e. the chimere. The robe has thus
become in the Church of England symbolic of the episcopal office, and is
in effect a liturgical [vestment](vestment "wikilink"). The
[rubric](rubric "wikilink") containing this direction was added to the
[Book of Common Prayer](Book_of_Common_Prayer "wikilink") in 1662; and
there is proof that the development of the chimere into at least a choir
vestment was subsequent to the
[Reformation](English_Reformation "wikilink"). Foxe, indeed, mentions
that Hooper at his consecration wore a long scarlet "chymere" down to
the foot (Acts and Mon., ed. 1563, p. 1051), a source of trouble to
himself and of scandal to other extreme reformers; but that this was no
more than the full civil dress of a bishop is proved by the fact that
Archbishop Parker at his consecration wore surplice and tippet, and only
put on the chimere, when the service was over, to go away in. This civil
quality of the garment still survives alongside the other; the full
dress of an Anglican prelate at civil functions of importance (e.g. in
parliament, or at court) is still rochet and chimere.

### Catholic counterparts

The 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica spoke of the zimarra or
[simarre](simar "wikilink") as the equivalent on the European continent
of the chimere and indicated that the English word was derived, through
Old French, from the Italian term *zimarra*.[4] It cited ecclesiologists
as defining the zimarra as a kind of [soutane](soutane "wikilink")
(cassock), from which it was distinguished by having a small cape and
short, open arms (manches-fausses) reaching to the middle of the upper
arm and decorated with buttons. The same ecclesiologists identified the
zimarra with the *epitogium*, which was described as "the uppermost
garment of the clergy, worn over the soutane, instead of the
*mantellum*". In France and Germany it was fitted more or less to the
figure; in Italy it was wider and fell down straight in front. Unlike
the chimere, it was not associated with any particular rank of clergy
and was not universally used by them.[5] As late as the middle of the
18th century, the zimarra was still in common use as an out-of-doors
overcoat, but after that it was in Italy associated with certain members
of the clergy, senators of the city of Rome (before the unification of
Italy) and university professors.[6] At the time of composition of the
Encyclopædia Britannica article, the Pope wore a black zimarra lined
with white, and sometimes ornamented with a white binding and gold
tassels.[7]

In the Catholic Church, the zimarra was never a liturgical vestment nor
part of choir dress. It was merely a more or less loose cloak that the
clergy sometimes used as part of their everyday civilian dress. In
[Italian](Italian_language "wikilink"), the term *zimarra* is generally
used not of a close-fitting garment, such as the
[cassock](cassock "wikilink"), but of a loose over-garment,[8] similar
to the fur-lined [Schaube](:de:Schaube "wikilink") used in northern
Europe.[9][10] Images of the zimarra as worn by women can be seen at
Dressing the Italian Way[11] and The Italian Showcase.[12]

While the word "chimere" is derived from the Italian word
"zimarra",[13][14] the Roman Catholic ecclesiastical garment that is
most like the loose-fitting chimere itself is the
[mantelletta](mantelletta "wikilink"),[15] whose use by cardinals and
bishops was abolished by the 1969*Instruction on the Dress, Titles and
Coats-of-Arms of Cardinals, Bishops and Lesser Prelates*.[16] The same
document abolished the mantelletta also for lesser prelates in general,
maintaining it only for a limited number of officials of the [Roman
Curia](Roman_Curia "wikilink").

## Academic Use

As an item of [academic dress](academic_dress "wikilink"), a slightly
modified version of the chimere is, for instance, prescribed at the
[University of Oxford](Oxford_University "wikilink") for doctors in
**Convocation Dress** — and as such it is referred to as the
**Convocation Habit**. The differences are that the chimere is worn open
and the Convocation Habit is worn closed with two large buttons.

If an Anglican bishop is part of the "platform party" at a commencement
(that is, the speaker, or is giving the invocation or benediction) he
may wear the rochet and chimere with the appropriate hood and academic
cap.

## References

## Sources

(incomplete)

-   the Report of the British parliamentary [sub-committee of
    Convocation](sub-committee_of_Convocation "wikilink") on the
    ornaments of the church and its ministers, p. 31 (London, 1908);
-   Herbert Druitt, *Costume on Brasses* (London, 1906)
-   G. Moroni, *Dizionario dell erudizione storico-ecclesiastica*
    (Venice, 1861), vol. 103, s.v. Zimarra
-   X. Barbier de Montault, *Traité pratique de la construction, etc.,
    des églises*, ii. 538 (Paris, 1878).

[Category:Academic dress](Category:Academic_dress "wikilink")
[Category:Anglican vestments](Category:Anglican_vestments "wikilink")
[Category:Robes and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] See [zimarra](:it:Zimarra "wikilink")

[9] See [Zimarra](:de:Zimarra "wikilink")

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14] [Herbert Thurston, "Clerical Costume", in [Catholic
Encyclopedia](Catholic_Encyclopedia "wikilink")](http://oce.catholic.com/index.php?title=Clerical_Costume)

[15]

[16] <http://www2.fiu.edu/~mirandas/instruction69.htm>