![](At_The_Fair_(5823095519).jpg "fig:At_The_Fair_(5823095519).jpg") in
[India](India "wikilink") wearing [gagra choli](gagra_choli "wikilink")
and dupatta.\]\] **Dupatta**, **Chunari**, **Chunariya**, or
**Audhani**, is a [shawl](shawl "wikilink")-like
[scarf](scarf "wikilink"), women's traditionally essential clothing from
the [Indian subcontinent](Indian_subcontinent "wikilink"). The dupatta
is currently used most commonly as part of the women's [shalwar
kameez](shalwar_kameez "wikilink") costume, and worn over the
[kurta](kurta "wikilink") and the [gharara](gharara "wikilink").

## Etymology

![](Bedi_Mahal-Lady_with_blue_chunni.JPG "fig:Bedi_Mahal-Lady_with_blue_chunni.JPG")
woman with blue chunni.\]\]
![](The_Buddha's_Descent_from_Heaven_at_Samkashya_(top;_a),_The_Story_of_the_Bodhisattva_Sadaprarudita_(middle;_b),_The_Buddha_Preaching_to_the_Assembled_Gods_(bottom;_c),_Three_Folios_from_LACMA_M.86.345.11a-c_(4_of_4).jpg "fig:The_Buddha's_Descent_from_Heaven_at_Samkashya_(top;_a),_The_Story_of_the_Bodhisattva_Sadaprarudita_(middle;_b),_The_Buddha_Preaching_to_the_Assembled_Gods_(bottom;_c),_Three_Folios_from_LACMA_M.86.345.11a-c_(4_of_4).jpg")

The word *dupatta*, originally from [Sanskrit](Sanskrit "wikilink") (the
liturgial language of [Hinduism](Hinduism "wikilink"))[1] is a
combination of *du-* (meaning double or twined) and *patta* (meaning
strip of cloth),[2] i. e., scarf usually doubled over the head.

## History

Early evidence of the dupatta can be traced to the [Indus valley
civilization](Indus_valley_civilization "wikilink"), where the sculpture
of the Priest-King whose left shoulder is covered with some kind of a
chaddar, suggests that the use of the dupatta dates back to this early
[Indic culture](History_of_India "wikilink").[3][4] Early
[Sanskrit](Sanskrit "wikilink") literature has a wide vocabulary of
terms for the veils and scarfs used by women during the ancient period,
such as *Avagunthana* meaning cloak-veil, *Uttariya* meaning
shoulder-veil, *Mukha-pata* meaning face-veil, *Siro-vastra* meaning
head-veil.[5] The dupatta is believed to have evolved from the ancient
[Uttariya](Uttariya "wikilink").[6][7][8]

## Use

![](Dopatta.jpg "fig:Dopatta.jpg"), Bangladesh.\]\]

Dupatta is worn in many regional styles across the Indian subcontinent.
Originally, it was worn as a symbol of modesty. While that symbolism
still continues, many today wear it as just a decorative accessory.
There is no single way of wearing the dupatta, and as time evolves and
fashion modernizes, the style of the dupatta has also evolved.
![](A_Dupatta_Store_in_Aziz_Super_Market,_Dhaka_07-01-2019.jpg "fig:A_Dupatta_Store_in_Aziz_Super_Market,_Dhaka_07-01-2019.jpg")
A dupatta is traditionally worn across both shoulders and around the
head. However, the dupatta can be worn like a cape around the entire
torso. The material for the dupatta varies according to the suit. [9]
There are various modes of wearing dupatta. When not draped over the
head in the traditional style, it is usually worn with the middle
portion of the dupatta resting on the chest like a garland, with the
ends thrown over each shoulder. When the dupatta is worn with the
shalwar-kameez it is casually allowed to flow down the front and back.
In current fashions, the dupatta is frequently draped over one shoulder,
and even over just the arms. Another recent trend is the short dupatta,
which is more a scarf or a stole, often worn with a
[kurti](kurta "wikilink") and Indo-Western clothing. Essentially, the
dupatta is often treated as an accessory in current urban fashion.[10]

When entering a [mosque](mosque "wikilink"),
[dargah](dargah "wikilink"), [church](church_(building) "wikilink"), or
[gurdwara](gurdwara "wikilink"), Indian women cover their head with a
dupatta.[11]

## Style

<File:Bandhani> Dupatta
(5788125979).jpg\|[Bandhani](Bandhani "wikilink") Dupatta <File:A> Day
Out With Friends (12300991844).jpg\|Bangladeshi woman in a different
style of draping dupatta

<File:Shriya> Saran LFW-2017.jpg\|Indian actress [Shriya
Saran](Shriya_Saran "wikilink") in a modern style of draping dupatta
over the neck, while wearing [shalwar kameez](shalwar_kameez "wikilink")
<File:Woman> of Nepal (13060777254).jpg\|Nepali woman in a modern style
of draping dupatta over the neck.

## References

## External links

[Category:Scarves](Category:Scarves "wikilink") [Category:Bangladeshi
clothing](Category:Bangladeshi_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Indian
clothing](Category:Indian_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Pakistani
headgear](Category:Pakistani_headgear "wikilink") [Category:Robes and
cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink") [Category:History of Asian
clothing](Category:History_of_Asian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Islamic female
clothing](Category:Islamic_female_clothing "wikilink")

[1] Swami Achuthanandam 2013, [Many Many Many Gods of Hinduism: Turning
believers into
belivers](https://books.google.com/books?id=PXX8AQAAQBAJ&pg=PT27&dq=sanskrit+is+hindi+liturgical+language&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjgud_e3L3fAhWJrY8KHf5dCEoQ6AEIKjAA#v=onepage&q=sanskrit%20is%20hindi%20liturgical%20language&f=false).
page 45-47.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] Govind Sadashiv Ghurye (1951) "Indian Costume.", p.236

[6] Simmi Jain (2003) "Encyclopaedia of Indian Women Through the Ages:
The middle ages.", p.200

[7] Anupa Pande(2002) "The Buddhist Cave Paintings Of Bagh", p.49

[8] Prachya Pratibha(1978) "Prachya Pratibha, Volume 6", p.121

[9] [Sikhi Wiki](http://www.sikhiwiki.org/index.php/Chunni)

[10]

[11]