![](BentoXVI-58-12052007.jpg "fig:BentoXVI-58-12052007.jpg") in white
[cassock](cassock "wikilink") with fringed fascia. Note the papal [coat
of arms](coat_of_arms "wikilink") near the bottom of the fascia. The
[cardinal](cardinal_(Catholicism) "wikilink") sitting behind him is
wearing a scarlet fascia.\]\]

The **fascia** is a [sash](sash "wikilink") worn by
[clerics](cleric "wikilink") and [seminarians](seminarian "wikilink")
with the [cassock](cassock "wikilink") in the [Roman Catholic
Church](Roman_Catholic_Church "wikilink") and in the [Anglican
Church](Anglican_Church "wikilink"). It is not worn as a belt but is
placed above the waist between the navel and the breastbone (sternum).
The ends that hang down are worn on the left side of the body and placed
a little forward but not completely off the left hip.

## Use

The fascia is not a [vestment](vestment "wikilink"), but is part of
[choir dress](choir_dress "wikilink") and is also used in more solemn
everyday dress.

## Colours

The [pope](pope "wikilink")'s fascia is [white](white "wikilink"). Only
the [pope](pope "wikilink") may have his [coat of
arms](coat_of_arms "wikilink") placed on the ends of the fascia that
hang down near or past the knees. The fascia worn by
[cardinals](Cardinal_(Catholicism) "wikilink") is
[scarlet](Scarlet_(color) "wikilink")-red watered silk. The fascia worn
by [nuncios](nuncio "wikilink") within the territories assigned to them
is [purple](purple "wikilink") watered silk.[1] The fascia worn by
[patriarchs](patriarchs "wikilink") (the Eastern Catholic patriarchs
have been allowed to wear scarlet in their choir dress at times,
especially before [Vatican II](Vatican_II "wikilink"), even when they
were not also cardinals) and [archbishops](archbishops "wikilink") and
[bishops](bishops "wikilink") who are not cardinals, [protonotaries
apostolic](protonotary_apostolic "wikilink"), [honorary
prelates](honorary_prelate "wikilink"), and [chaplains of His
Holiness](Chaplain_of_His_Holiness "wikilink") (these three are the
different ranks of [monsignors](monsignor "wikilink") from highest to
lowest) is plain (not watered) [purple](purple "wikilink"). The fascia
worn by [priests](priests "wikilink"), [deacons](deacons "wikilink") and
[seminarians](seminarians "wikilink") is [black](black "wikilink"),
while the fascia worn by [priests](priests "wikilink") in the service of
the Papal Household is black watered silk.

## Forms

Prior to the changes that followed the [Second Vatican
Council](Second_Vatican_Council "wikilink") there were two types of
fascia: the *tufted* fascia, on which each end was finished in a single
large tassel, and the *fringed* fascia, on which each end is straight
and finished with fringe. The Instruction *Ut sive sollicite* of the
[Secretariat of State](Secretariat_of_State "wikilink"), dated 31 March
1969,[2] declared that "the sash with tassels is abolished" for
cardinals,[3] bishops,[4] and "Prelate Superiors of the
[Dicasteries](Dicastery "wikilink") of the [Roman
Curia](Roman_Curia "wikilink") who do not have the episcopal dignity,
the [Auditors](Auditor_(ecclesiastical) "wikilink") of the [Sacred Roman
Rota](Sacred_Roman_Rota "wikilink"), the Promotor General of Justice and
the [Defender of the Bond](Defender_of_the_Bond "wikilink") in the
[Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic
Signatura](Supreme_Tribunal_of_the_Apostolic_Signatura "wikilink"), the
[Protonotaries Apostolic](Protonotary_Apostolic "wikilink") *de numero*,
the Clerics of the [Apostolic Camera](Apostolic_Camera "wikilink") and
the Prelates of the Pontifical Antechamber".[5] This Instruction did not
deal with [canons](Canon_(priest) "wikilink"),[6] some few of whom have
retained the tufted sash to which membership of their particular
[chapter](chapter_(religion) "wikilink") entitled them.

## References

[Category:History of clothing](Category:History_of_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing
(Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:Catholic clerical
clothing](Category:Catholic_clerical_clothing "wikilink")
[Regalia](Category:Holy_See "wikilink") [Category:Robes and
cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")

[1] [Instruction *Ut sive sollicite*,
32](http://www2.fiu.edu/~mirandas/instruction69.htm)

[2] [Text of the Instruction in English, published by *L'Osservatore
Romano*](http://www2.fiu.edu/~mirandas/instruction69.htm)

[3] Instruction, 3

[4] Instruction, 15

[5] Instruction, 18

[6] Instruction, 35