A **kandys**, plural *kandyes* (, plural , probably from [Old
Persian](Old_Persian "wikilink") \* kandu "mantle, cover"), also called
**candys**,[1] **kantuš** or **Median robe**,[2][3] is a type of
three-quarter-length Persian coat. It originally described a leather
cloak with sleeves worn by men, but evolved into a garment [worn by
Athenian women](Clothing_in_ancient_Greece "wikilink").[4] The kandys is
sometimes compared to the much later 17th-19th century military
[pelisse](pelisse "wikilink") as worn by [Hussars](Hussar "wikilink"),
in the sense that it was a sleeved jacket or coat worn cloak-style.[5]

## Semantics

It is suggested that the term *kandys*/*candys* was probably an Iranian
word that was appropriated by the Greeks to describe the Persian
garment, which in [Old Persian](Old_Persian "wikilink") would have been
called *kandu* (cloak).[6] Other [Old Iranian](Old_Iranian "wikilink")
terms include *kanzu-ka* ([Median](Median_language "wikilink")),
*kan-su-ka* ([Elamite](Elamite_language "wikilink")) and *gnjwg*
([Parthian](Parthian_language "wikilink")), all of which correspond with
the term [cloak](cloak "wikilink").[7] The prefix 'kan-', in such
languages, means to cover or to throw, as in a coat thrown round the
shoulders.[8] Although some sources have suggested a link to *kontusz*,
the [Polish](Polish_language "wikilink") term for a
[greatcoat](greatcoat "wikilink"),[9][10] the link is anachronistic and
not considered credible.[11]

## Persian usage

![](Persepolis_Darafsh_2_(13).JPG "fig:Persepolis_Darafsh_2_(13).JPG")
of [Persepolis](Persepolis "wikilink"), 550-330 BC.\]\] The earliest
evidence of the sleeved kandys is found on a 9th-century BC
[Iranian](Iran "wikilink") [bronze](bronze "wikilink") stand excavataed
at [Teppe Hasanlu](Teppe_Hasanlu "wikilink"), while garments have been
found in 4th and 5th century BC [Scythian](Scythian "wikilink") graves
showing that the sleeves were so narrow and placed in such a manner that
they could not realistically function as sleeves.[12] The kandys was
worn as a cloak rather than a coat, except in the presence of the King
for inspections, when the arms were placed in the kandys's overlong or
sewn-up sleeves.[13] This has been interpreted as a precaution against
assassination attempts.[14] The Persian kandys was often purple, or made
from leather and skins.[15] Since 1990 the [Encyclopædia
Iranica](Encyclopædia_Iranica "wikilink") has stated that most people
believe that the candys (their spelling), along with a long-sleeved coat
called a sárapis and long trousers called anaxyrides, formed part of the
riding dress of the [Medes](Medes "wikilink") people and is represented
by the mantle with hanging empty sleeves portrayed in the
[Persepolis](Persepolis "wikilink") [reliefs](relief "wikilink").[16]
These reliefs are also used as evidence for the theory that the Persian
kandys may have acted as a status garment, as they are shown being worn
by Iranian nobility, but not by their servants.[17]

## Greek usage

The kandys, now made with functional sleeves, was historically [worn by
Greek women](Clothing_in_ancient_Greece "wikilink"), particularly in
[Athens](Athens "wikilink"), in the 4th century BC,[18] and towards the
end of the 5th century BC.[19] At this time, fashions were increasingly
influenced by imports from the East and [Asia
Minor](Asia_Minor "wikilink").[20] Among the more typical
[chitons](chiton_(costume) "wikilink") and
[himatia](himation "wikilink") that Athenian women dedicated to
[Artemis](Artemis "wikilink") at
[Brauron](Cult_of_Artemis_at_Brauron "wikilink") were six kandyes,
mostly described as being patterned.[21] One of these was dedicated in
347 BC, although no dates were given for the other dedications, and
Margaret C. Miller suggests they must date no later than the early 4th
century BC.[22] In Greece, the six kandyes linked with Brauron also had
special significance - two were chosen to adorn the cult statue, one may
have been made of silk, and another is described as ornamented with
gold.[23] Miller notes that one was made from [linen](linen "wikilink"),
which was considered unusual enough to mention in the lists, in contrast
to the leather used for Persian kandyes, and suggests the use of
Greek-made linen means that kandyes were made in Greece as well as
potentially imported from Persia.[24] At odds with the concept of the
kandys as a symbol of luxury is an interpretation from the 1990s where
the kandys is described as reflecting non-[Attic](Attica "wikilink") and
[slave](Slavery_in_ancient_Greece "wikilink") status.[25][26] Towards
the end of the 5th century BC, Miller noted a surge in the number of
depictions of Athenian women and children wearing kandys-like
garments.[27] While girls wore them as overgarments, small boys wore
them open and without undergarments.[28] One suggestion was that the
kandys was dedicated prior to marriage, as a child's garment, but Miller
notes that this interpretation is challenged by the use of husband's
names in the Brauronian lists, and that contemporary vase paintings show
mature women wearing kandyes.[29]

![](Sasanides_in_Byzantine_palace.jpg "fig:Sasanides_in_Byzantine_palace.jpg")
embassy to Byzantine Empire, stone relief in [Istanbul Archaeological
Museums](Istanbul_Archaeological_Museums "wikilink"), Turkey\]\]

## References

[Category:Greek clothing](Category:Greek_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Robes and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")
[Category:Iranian clothing](Category:Iranian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Leather clothing](Category:Leather_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] Hall draws a comparison between the kandys and the Russian
[sarafan](sarafan "wikilink"), also a Persian import that was originally
a man's [kaftan](kaftan "wikilink") before evolving in the 17th century
into a woman's sleeveless dress.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9] , [cited by Nick
Sekunda](https://books.google.com/books?id=GHcp9b_PYaYC&pg=PA13&dq#v=onepage&q&f=false)

[10] , [cited by Rüdiger
Schmitt](http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/candys-gk)

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]