![](King_Vajiravudh_in_barrister-at-law_gown.jpg "fig:King_Vajiravudh_in_barrister-at-law_gown.jpg")
wearing the *khrui* of a barrister-at-law\]\]

The ***khrui*** (, ) is a light outer garment worn as a gown or
[robe](robe "wikilink") in certain ceremonial settings in
[Thailand](Thailand "wikilink"). It is long-sleeved and open at the
front, and is made of a sheer or mesh fabric, lined with a band of
satin, felt or other material, and may be exquisitely embroidered.
Dating from at least the 17th century, it was originally worn only in
the royal court, but nowadays is most recognisable as the form of
[academic dress](academic_dress "wikilink") employed by many
universities, especially [Chulalongkorn
University](Chulalongkorn_University "wikilink").

## History

The exact origins of the *khrui* are not known, although it has been
postulated that it was likely of Persian and/or Indian import.[1] The
earliest documentation of its use are from illustrations of the French
embassy to King [Narai](Narai "wikilink") in 1685 and [that of Siam to
France in 1686](Siamese_embassy_to_France_(1686) "wikilink"), showing
the Siamese king and ambassadors wearing such garments. Use of the
*khrui* continued into the [Rattanakosin
period](Rattanakosin_period "wikilink"), as evidenced by mention in the
1804 [Law of Three Seals](Law_of_Three_Seals "wikilink") prohibiting its
use by junior government officials.[2]

King [Vajiravudh](Vajiravudh "wikilink") (Rama VI) further codified the
*khrui*'s use by royal ordinance in 1912, specifying the different types
and ranks to be worn by entitled royals and government officials.[3] He
later also granted permission for it to be used as the [academic
dress](academic_dress "wikilink") of the Royal Pages School ([Vajiravudh
College](Vajiravudh_College "wikilink")) in 1913 and Siam's [Bar
Association](Bar_Association "wikilink") in 1915.[4][5] It was adopted
as the academic dress for graduates of [Chulalongkorn
University](Chulalongkorn_University "wikilink") in 1930.[6] Since 1967,
some other universities have also adopted the *khrui* as their academic
regalia, and the term *khrui* has acquired the more general meaning of
any style of academic or [court dress](court_dress "wikilink").

## Appearance

![](CU_Ph.D.'s_academic_gown_(Graduate_School).jpg "fig:CU_Ph.D.'s_academic_gown_(Graduate_School).jpg")
\]\] The *khrui* is a tailored robe, usually knee-to-calf-length, with
long sleeves and an open front. It is made of a sheer or mesh fabric,
usually white in colour, giving it a translucent appearance. The entire
rim and the ends of the sleeves are lined with bands of a thicker
material, usually [satin](satin "wikilink"), [felt](felt "wikilink"), or
a substitute, with another like pair of bands encircling the sleeves
above elbow level. When used as academic dress, these bands usually bear
specific patterns denoting the wearer's affiliated institution and
academic degree. When used in ceremonial settings by senior government
officials or royalty, the gown may be embroidered with certain patterns
of [goldwork](goldwork_(embroidery) "wikilink") depending on the rank of
the wearer.[7] *Khrui* used as royal attire differ further in certain
details, and may be made of coloured or gold cloth.

## Use

*Khrui* traditionally denoted royal or noble status, and was worn only
by men. Members of the royal family would first use it during their
*[sokan](Royal_tonsure_ceremony "wikilink")*
([topknot-cutting](Thai_topknot-cutting_ceremony "wikilink")) ceremony.
The king would wear it on special occasions such as his coronation,
royal processions or when receiving special audiences.[8] Its use by
*nak*—novices preparing to undergo [upasampada](upasampada "wikilink")
(Buddhist ordination)—is the only occasion where the *khrui* is worn
regardless of a person's social rank.

According to the 1912 ordinance, persons may be entitled to wear *khrui*
through rank, office, or further royal permission. Entitled ranks
include Grand Companions and above of the [Order of Chula Chom
Klao](Order_of_Chula_Chom_Klao "wikilink") and Knight Commanders and
above of the Orders of [the White
Elephant](Order_of_the_White_Elephant "wikilink") or [the Crown of
Thailand](Order_of_the_Crown_of_Thailand "wikilink"). Judges may wear it
during [full dress](full_dress "wikilink") royal ceremonies; other
government officials may wear it during such ceremonies if they are
performing certain addresses, or if it has been specified for the
occasion.[9][10] Such occasions are nowadays rare, though the *khrui* is
still seen in the ceremonial costumes worn during the annual [Royal
Ploughing Ceremony](Royal_Ploughing_Ceremony "wikilink") and occasional
royal processions.

Today, the *khrui* is most readily identified as the academic dress of
several Thai universities, Chulalongkorn University being its oldest and
most prominent adopter. It is worn without a cap, over the university's
dress uniform (usually a [raj pattern](raj_pattern "wikilink") jacket
and white trousers for males, white blouse and navy skirt for females)
for undergraduate degrees, or a suit and tie for graduate degrees. Like
most of its counterparts, it use in this form is usually seen only
during graduation ceremonies.

## Gallery

### Royal gowns

<File:Prajadhipok's> coronation records - 001.jpg\|King
[Prajadhipok](Prajadhipok "wikilink") signs the [Constitution of the
Kingdom of Siam, Buddhist Era 2475
(1932)](Constitution_of_Thailand#1932_Constitution "wikilink"), on 10
December 1932, wearing the Gown of the Great House of Chakri
(ครุยมหาจักรีบรมราชวงศ์; *Khrui Maha Chakkri Boromma Ratchawong*) and
the Crown of Five Tops (ชฎาห้ายอด;
*[Chada](Chada_and_mongkut "wikilink") Ha Yot*). <File:King> Rama in
full Regalia.jpg\|King [Mongkut](Mongkut "wikilink") wears the Gown of
the Great House of Chakri, the [Great Crown of
Victory](Great_Crown_of_Victory "wikilink") and the [Royal
Slippers](Royal_Slippers "wikilink"); photo taken around 1851.
<File:Nangklao> portrait.jpg\|A painting depicts King
[Nangklao](Nangklao "wikilink") wearing the Gown of the Great House of
Chakri. <File:Bhumbol> coronation 2.jpg\|Proceeding from the [Grand
Palace](Grand_Palace "wikilink") to the [Temple of the Emerald
Buddha](Wat_Phra_Kaew "wikilink") on 5 May 1950, King [Bhumibol
Adulyadej](Bhumibol_Adulyadej "wikilink") wears the Gold-Woven Gown
(ครุยกรองทอง; *Khrui Krong Thong*). Part of the [Coronation of the Thai
monarch](Coronation_of_the_Thai_monarch "wikilink").

### Official gowns

#### "Nobleman's Gown"

<File:Phra> Maha Phichai Ratcharot carried Bejaratana Rajasuda's royal
urn.JPG\|The officers on the Chariot of Great Victory wear the
Nobleman's Gowns (ครุยขุนนาง; *Khrui Khun Nang*) together with the
ancient official headgear called *[Lomphok](Lomphok "wikilink")*
(ลอมพอก). The Chariot is carrying the urn of Princess [Bejaratana
Rajasuda](Bejaratana_Rajasuda "wikilink") to the crematorium at [Sanam
Luang](Sanam_Luang "wikilink") on 9 April 2012. <File:Procession> for
Bejaratana Rajasuda's relics (carried on Phra Thinang Rajendrayan) from
the royal crematorium to the Grand Palace.JPG\|An officer supporting the
urn of Princess Bejaratana Rajasuda on the Lord's Palanquin wears the
Nobleman's Gown and the *Lomphok*, 10 April 2012. <File:Ratcharot> Phra
Nam in the procession of Princess Galyani Vadhana.jpg\|The officers on
the Minor Chariot wear the Nobleman's Gown and the *Lomphok*. The
Chariot is carrying The Most Reverend [Somdet Phra Wannarat (Chun
Phrommakhutto)](:th:สมเด็จพระวันรัต_(จุนท์_พฺรหฺมคุตฺโต) "wikilink"),
the Abbot of [Wat Bowonniwet Vihara](Wat_Bowonniwet_Vihara "wikilink"),
on 15 November 2008. <File:Almanach> 1687 Kosa Pan with Louis XIV.jpg\|A
French drawing depicts Siamese diplomats, including [Kosa
Pan](Kosa_Pan "wikilink"), wearing the Nobleman's Gown and the *Lomphok*
while having an audience with [Louis XIV](Louis_XIV "wikilink") in 1687.
<File:SiameseEmbassyToLouisXIV1686NicolasLarmessin.jpg%7CA> French
drawing depicts Siamese diplomats wearing the Nobleman's Gown and the
*Lomphok* while presenting King [Narai](Narai "wikilink")'s missive to
Louis XIV in 1687.

#### "Ministerial Gown"

<File:Abhisit> Vejjajiva and Pimpen Sakuntabhai.jpg\|Prime Minister
[Abhisit Vejjajiva](Abhisit_Vejjajiva "wikilink") wears the First-Class
Ministerial Gown (ครุยเสนามาตย์ชั้นเอก; *Khrui Senamat Chan Ek*). This
golden brocaded gown was part of the traditional attire of the Chief
Minister of the Civil Service in ancient times and is now still in
ceremonial use. <File:ChaiChidchob.jpg>\|[Chai
Chidchob](Chai_Chidchob "wikilink") wears the Second-Class Ministerial
Gown (ครุยเสนามาตย์ชั้นโท; *Khrui Senamat Chan Tho*). A recipient of the
first or second class of the [Order of Chula Chom
Klao](Order_of_Chula_Chom_Klao "wikilink") is entitled to wear this
gown.

### Academic gowns

<File:Rama_VII's_royal_academic_gown.jpg%7CAn> academic gown of
[Chulalongkorn University](Chulalongkorn_University "wikilink"), worn by
King Prajadhipok. <File:Tevaprapas.jpg%7CA> graduate of [Sukhothai
Thammathirat Open
University](Sukhothai_Thammathirat_Open_University "wikilink") wears the
university's academic gown.

## See also

-   [Academic dress of Chulalongkorn
    University](Academic_dress_of_Chulalongkorn_University "wikilink")

## Footnotes

## References

[Category:Thai clothing](Category:Thai_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Robes and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")
[Category:Academic dress](Category:Academic_dress "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]