The ***Kinsale Cloak***, worn until the twentieth century in Kinsale and
West Cork, was the last remaining cloak style in
[Ireland](Ireland "wikilink"). It was a woman's wool outer garment which
evolved from the Irish cloak, a garment worn by both men and women for
many centuries.

![](Colleen_in_Kinsale_Cloak.jpg "Colleen_in_Kinsale_Cloak.jpg")

## Historical development

The Kinsale Cloak, also known as the West Cork Cloak or Irish Cloak,
evolved from [cloaks](cloak "wikilink") which were worn throughout
Europe since at least the [Bronze Age](Bronze_Age "wikilink"). Worn
since prehistoric times in Ireland, by the early historic period, the
outer wrap garment had become a four-cornered “brat” of almost
rectangular shape. In a 1904 discovery in Armoy, County Antirm, Ireland,
late Bronze Age tools were found wrapped in a woolen brat sewn from two
pieces of wool, giving evidence that cloaks were worn in Ireland as far
back as 750BC.[1]

Likely by 600AD, the brat had evolved into a cape-like shape of the type
worn in the drawing of St. Matthew in the [Book of
Durrow](Book_of_Durrow "wikilink") (dated to shortly after 600AD), which
was fitted at the shoulders and reached to below the knees.[2]

In the sixteenth century, when cloaks became common items of dress in
Europe, woolen weather-proof cloaks evolved in Ireland.[3] However,
English laws passed during the reign of [Henry
VIII](Henry_VIII "wikilink") tried to get rid of the cloak as an item of
dress in Ireland. During the Elizabethan Wars, the cloak was especially
frowned-upon because it was associated with rebellion: it was both warm
and waterproof, and it enabled Irish fighting men to remain out in the
hills in the worst of weather. "A fit house for an outlaw, a meet bed
for a rebel, and an apt cloak for a thief", wrote [Edmund
Spenser](Edmund_Spenser "wikilink"), an English poet who lived in the
[Elizabethan era](Elizabethan_era "wikilink"), describing the Irish
cloak at the end of the sixteenth century.[4]

Irish women of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries adopted the
hooded cloak as a general-purpose outdoor garment. These cloaks varied
in colour throughout Ireland, being red in
[Cork](County_Cork "wikilink") and blue in
[Waterford](Waterford "wikilink"), but the material was always a quality
melton, which has a wool pile.[5]

## Nineteenth century

In 1842, Mr. and Mrs. [S.C. Hall](Samuel_Carter_Hall "wikilink") praised
the Irish cloak commenting on its "graceful drapery". They said that
"the material falls well and folds well. It is usually large enough to
envelope the whole person; and the hood is frequently drawn forward to
shield the face of the wearer from sun, rain or wind."[6]

In the early nineteenth century, red was a popular color used for
cloaks, but it began to fall out of favor. According to Dunlevy, "An
aversion to the colour red in these cloaks developed in some places: an
aversion explained by [Thomas Crofton
Croker](Thomas_Crofton_Croker "wikilink") as due to the consternation
caused through confusion with the red coats of the English soldiers at
the time of the [1798 rebellion](1798_rebellion "wikilink"). While his
anecdote may contain some truth, an equally likely reason was the cost
of red dye, for grey or “undyed” cloaks were used by the less wealthy in
areas where red was popular. The Dublin Society surveys record that in
the first decades of the nineteenth century the fashion for red cloaks
survived strongly in Sligo, Leitrim, Longford, Cork, Meath and in
Connacht, but that different shades of blue, as well as grey and black,
were used throughout the country."[7]

By the end of the nineteenth century, and following the social upheaval
of the [Famine of 1847](Great_Famine_(Ireland) "wikilink"), the
traditional hooded cloak had nearly disappeared from much of Ireland,
but remained popular in the western part of the country, thus giving the
name "The [Kinsale](Kinsale "wikilink") Cloak" or "[West
Cork](West_Cork "wikilink") Cloak" to the garment.[8]

## Twentieth century

By the Twentieth Century, West Cork alone upheld the tradition of the
Irish cloak, and with rare exception black was the common colour. They
were often a mother's present to her daughter on getting married and
handed down from one generation to the next.[9]

Throughout West Cork, the overall design of the cloak did not vary, but
details such as the ornamental beaded braidwork did - and so towns like
Macroom, Bandon, Clonakilty, Skibbereen and Bantry claimed to have had
local garments. Because the variations were small, it would be more
accurate to speak of the West Cork Cloak as a general term rather than
mentioning the individual towns, with the exception of Kinsale. The hood
of the West Cork Cloak was never to be thrown back entirely, however the
Kinsale Cloak had a hood that could be worn either erect or thrown
back.[10]

The cloak was entirely hand made, and sewn with a long needle. Four
yards of heavy black cloth ([melton](Melton_(cloth) "wikilink")) went
into the making and the trimmings included [satin](satin "wikilink") for
lining, [jet](Jet_stone "wikilink") and beaded braid. Fastened by a
single [hook and eye](hook_and_eye "wikilink") near the neck, the folds
of the garment were relieved by a pair of mock pockets faced with
[jet](Jet_stone "wikilink"), which covered the hand slits.[11]

The upper part of hood proper was, if possible, fuller than the cloak,
being gathered and rucked behind the neck. The inside of the hood was
satin lined and the top of the hood was finished with a satin bow.
Within the hood sat the flat jet collar ornamented with a pattern of
beaded braid and tied with a satin bow over the single functional
fastening of the cloak.[12]

Two of the best known Kinsale Cloak makers were Ellen Kirby (née
Richardson) and her daughter Mary. Ellen Kirby was born in Ballinspittle
near Kinsale in 1834, and learned the art of cloak making from her
mother. Mrs. Kirby's workroom was at Fisher Street in Kinsale, but she
also covered parts of West Cork travelling regularly by train to Bandon
and Clonakilty to take orders and measurements. The cost of materials
for a Kinsale Hood Cloak prior to 1920 was about 14 to 20 pounds, and
Mrs. Kirby's charge for making the cloak was five shillings. After her
death in 1920, her daughter Mary, a dressmaker, took up the business and
dedicated herself to its traditional skills until her own death in 1940
at the age of eighty-two.[13]

## Today

A Kinsale cloak is on display in "The Way We Wore" exhibit[14] among the
[National Museum of Ireland – Decorative Arts and
History](National_Museum_of_Ireland_–_Decorative_Arts_and_History "wikilink")
collections in Dublin. Although the Kinsale Cloak is no longer seen on
the streets of Ireland, it has occasionally inspired fashion designers
to create evening cloaks with a similar design. The Kinsale-style cloak
is most often worn today at historical reenactments and Renaissance
Faires internationally, in part due to a popular sewing pattern
available to the home seamstress.

<File:The> Irish Hood.jpg\|"The Irish Hood" by Daniel Maclise (1837)
showing a woman wearing a Kinsale Cloak <File:The> Kinsale Cloak on an
Irish Colleen.jpg\|An 'Irish Colleen' wearing a cloak and holding rosary
beads <File:Clothing> of people of the West of Ireland around
1900.jpg\|Nineteenth century clothing of people of the west of Ireland.
The Kinsale Cloak was worn about a finger length shorter than the skirt
<File:Back> of a Kinsale Cloak.jpg\|The back of a Kinsale Cloak, made by
Mrs. Kirby, showing the satin lining of the hood and the beadwork on the
collar <File:Collar> of Kinsale Cloak showing beading.jpg\|Glass beading
on the back collar of this Kinsale Cloak suggests it was a cloak for
special occasions

## References

## Further reading

-   Minihane, Hannah. "Reflections and Recollections of the Hooded Cloak
    of Kinsale". *The Kinsale Record*. 4(43).
-   [Irish
    Cloak](http://literati.credoreference.com/content/entry/orionirishpf/irish_cloak/0?searchId=78effeed-d0ae-11e6-a815-0e811e6e1ce7&result=1)". (2009)
    *Brewer's Dictionary of Irish Phrase and Fable*. London, Chambers
    Harrap Publishers Ltd

[Category:Kinsale](Category:Kinsale "wikilink") [Category:Social history
of Ireland](Category:Social_history_of_Ireland "wikilink")
[Category:Robes and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing
(Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:Irish clothing](Category:Irish_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]