![](Cleric_mantelletta_2009.jpg "fig:Cleric_mantelletta_2009.jpg") A
**mantelletta**, Italian diminutive of Latin *mantellum* 'mantle', is a
sleeveless, knee-length, vest-like garment, open in front, with slits
instead of sleeves on the sides, fastened at the neck, once even more
common than the [mozzetta](mozzetta "wikilink").

## History

![](Evêque_en_rochet_mantelet_et_mozette.jpg "fig:Evêque_en_rochet_mantelet_et_mozette.jpg"),
[rochet](rochet "wikilink"), a mantelletta and a
[mozzetta](mozzetta "wikilink")\]\] The mantelletta is probably
connected with the *mantellum* of the cardinals in the "Ordo" of
[Gregory X](Gregory_X "wikilink") (1271–1276) and with the mantellum of
the prelates in the "Ordo" of [Petrus
Amelius](Petrus_Amelius "wikilink") (d. 1401), which was a vestment
similar to a [scapular](scapular "wikilink"). Before 1969, it was worn
instead of the [mozzetta](mozzetta "wikilink") over the
[rochet](rochet "wikilink") by any [bishop](bishop "wikilink") outside
his place of jurisdiction. A symbol of prelacy, but also of limitation,
it was therefore always worn by auxiliary bishops (who were never in
their own dioceses), by an [archbishop](archbishop "wikilink") only when
outside of his province, and by a bishop only when outside of his
diocese. Within their own areas of jurisdiction they wore the mozzetta
instead. The mantelletta was also worn by cardinals (who wore it under
the mozzetta) only when in the city of Rome, as a symbol of the
cardinal's rank throughout the church (hence they wore only the mozzetta
even outside their own dioceses), but in deference to the pope's
authority when in his home diocese (thus the only place where they wore
the mantelletta).

It was likewise ordinary choir dress for several classes of
[monsignor](monsignor "wikilink"), the so-called **prelates di
manteletta**: the [protonotaries apostolic *de
numero*](protonotary_apostolic "wikilink") (the highest class of
monsignor), domestic prelates (now called "prelates of honor") who are
also addressed as "monsignor," and others who had been granted the
privilege to wear it, including auditors of the [Sacred Roman
Rota](Sacred_Roman_Rota "wikilink") and a few other high functionaries
of the Vatican if they were not bishops. Certain chapters of
[canons](Canon_(priest) "wikilink") have also been specifically granted
the privilege.

The colour for [cardinals](Cardinal_(Catholicism) "wikilink") was
ordinarily red, in penitential seasons and for times of mourning it was
violet, on [Gaudete](Gaudete "wikilink") and
[Laetare](Laetare "wikilink") Sundays rose-colour; for the other
dignitaries, the same distinctions being made, the colour was violet or
black with a violet border. Cardinals and bishops belonging to orders
which have a distinctive dress, also [abbots](abbot "wikilink") who are
entitled to wear the mantelletta, retain for it the colour of the habit
of the order (gray for Franciscans, black for Dominicans, white for
Cistercians, etc.). The vestment was made of silk only when it is worn
by cardinals or by bishops or prelates belonging to the papal court.

Under reforms enacted by [Pope Paul VI](Pope_Paul_VI "wikilink") and
specified by an instruction of the [Secretariat of
State](Secretariat_of_State_(Vatican) "wikilink") in 1969, the
mantelletta was abolished for cardinals and bishops, who now wear the
[mozzetta](mozzetta "wikilink") when appropriate. The violet mantelletta
is no longer used except by a handful of prelates who reside in Rome,
primarily the seven remaining apostolic protonotaries *de numero* and a
few superior prelates of the offices of the Roman Curia if they are not
bishops. It is now effectively a garment of the diocese of Rome; other
monsignors do not use it. According to Noonan, the proper color of the
mantelletta for chapters of canons who still wear it is grey or black
with colored trim.

## Mantellone

The mantellone differed from the mantelletta by being longer (reaching
to the floor) and having wing-like sleeves and was not worn with the
rochet. The mantellone was formerly used by the lowest rank of
[monsignori](monsignor "wikilink"), then called privy chamberlains, but
now [chaplains of His Holiness](Chaplain_of_His_Holiness "wikilink"). It
was abolished by [Pope Paul VI](Pope_Paul_VI "wikilink") in 1969.[1]

## References

## Sources and references

-

-

-

-   Paul VI. "On the Papal Household." *On the Papal Household, Reform
    of the Use of Pontifical Insignia, Simplification of Pontifical
    Rites and Insignia*. Washington, DC: United States Catholic
    Conference, 1968.

-   "Instruction on the dress, titles and coat-of-arms of cardinals,
    bishops and lesser prelates." *[L'Osservatore
    Romano](L'Osservatore_Romano "wikilink")*, English ed. 17 Apr.
    1969: 4. . Online at
    [<http://www.fiu.edu/~mirandas/instruction69.htm>](http://www.fiu.edu/~mirandas/instruction69.htm)

[Category:Officials of the Roman
Curia](Category:Officials_of_the_Roman_Curia "wikilink") [Category:Papal
chamberlains](Category:Papal_chamberlains "wikilink") [Category:Robes
and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink") [Category:Catholic
clerical clothing](Category:Catholic_clerical_clothing "wikilink")

[1] [Instruction on the Dress, Titles and Coat-of-Arms of Cardinals,
Bishops and Lesser
Prelates](http://www2.fiu.edu/~mirandas/instruction69.htm), 20