![](Mantua_MET_DT6543.jpg "fig:Mantua_MET_DT6543.jpg") brocade, British,
c. 1708 ([MET](Metropolitan_Museum_of_Art "wikilink"))\]\] A **mantua**
(from the French *manteuil* or "mantle") is an article of women's
[clothing](clothing "wikilink") worn in the late 17th century and 18th
century. Originally a loose [gown](gown "wikilink"), the later mantua
was an overgown or [robe](robe "wikilink") typically worn over
[stays](History_of_corsets#16th_to_late_18th_centuries "wikilink"),
[stomacher](stomacher "wikilink") and a co-ordinating
[petticoat](petticoat "wikilink").

The mantua or *manteau* was a new fashion that arose in the 1680s.
Instead of a bodice and skirt cut separately, the mantua hung from the
shoulders to the floor (in the manner of dresses of earlier periods)
started off as the female version of the men's
[banyan](Banyan_(clothing) "wikilink"), worn for 'undress' wear.
Gradually it developed into a draped and pleated dress and eventually
evolved into a dress worn looped and draped up over a contrasting
petticoat and a stomacher. The mantua-and-stomacher resulted in a high,
square neckline in contrast to the broad, off-the-shoulder neckline
previously in fashion. The new look was both more modest and covered-up
than previous fashions and decidedly fussy, with bows, frills, ribbons,
and other trim, but the short string of pearls and pearl earrings or
*eardrops* worn since the 1630s remained popular.

The mantua, made from a single length of fabric pleated to fit with a
long train, was ideal for showing the designs of the new elaborately
patterned silks that replaced the solid-colored satins popular in
mid-century.[1]

## Semantics

The origins of the term *mantua* to mean a robe are unclear. The garment
may have been named after [Mantua](Mantua "wikilink"), in
[Italy](Italy "wikilink"), a centre of production for some of the
expensive silks that would have been used to make up such garments. The
term may also derive from *manteau*, the
[French](French_language "wikilink") term for a coat.

From this garment arose the term
*[mantua-maker](mantua-maker "wikilink")*, an early term for a women's
[dressmaker](dressmaker "wikilink").

## Evolution of the mantua

The earliest mantuas emerged in the late 17th century as a comfortable
alternative to the boned bodices and separate skirts then widely worn.

The mantua featured elbow-length, cuffed [sleeves](sleeve "wikilink"),
and the [overskirt](overskirt "wikilink") was typically drawn back over
the hips to expose the petticoat beneath. In the earliest mantuas, the
long [trained](train_(clothing) "wikilink") skirt was allowed to trail.
From about 1710, it became customary to pin up the train. The
construction of the mantua was altered so that once the train was pinned
up, the exposed reverse of the train showed the proper face of the
fabric or embroidery. One of the earliest extant examples of this, dated
to 1710–1720, is in the [Victoria and Albert
Museum](Victoria_and_Albert_Museum "wikilink")'s collections.[2]

By the mid-18th century, the mantua had evolved into a formal version
principally worn for [court dress](court_dress "wikilink"). The draping
of the overskirt became increasingly stylized, with the back panel of
the train almost entirely concealed.[3][4]

The final version of the mantua, circa 1780, bore little resemblance to
the original mantuas of nearly a century earlier. Instead of earlier
elaborate draperies and folds, the train had evolved into a length of
fabric attached to the back of the bodice, as illustrated in an example
in the Victoria and Albert Museum.[5]

## Surviving examples

![](Court_dress_MET_DT11838.jpg "fig:Court_dress_MET_DT11838.jpg")
Extant examples of the 17th century mantua are extremely scarce. Perhaps
the only known extant adult-size example is an embroidered wool mantua
and petticoat[6] in the [Metropolitan Museum of
Art](Metropolitan_Museum_of_Art "wikilink")'s [Costume
Institute](Met_Costume_Institute "wikilink"). A pattern taken from this
mantua has been published by Norah Waugh.[7] The Victoria and Albert
Museum owns an extremely rare late 17th century fashion doll dressed in
a pink silk mantua and petticoat.[8]

Also in the Costume Institute is a mantua and petticoat in salmon pink
[bizarre silk](bizarre_silk "wikilink") dated to 1708.[9] Another early
mantua, the silk dated to c. 1708–09 belongs to the Clive House Museum,
Shrewsbury; a pattern for this mantua has been taken by Janet
Arnold.[10]

Most mantuas preserved in museum collections are formal versions from
the mid-18th century, intended for [court
dress](court_dress "wikilink").

## See also

-   [1650–1700 in fashion](1650–1700_in_fashion "wikilink")
-   [1700–1750 in fashion](1700–1750_in_fashion "wikilink")

## References

<references />

## Further reading

-   Janet Arnold: *Patterns of Fashion 1 (cut and construction of
    women's clothing, 1660–1860)* Wace 1964, Macmillan 1972. ()

## External links

-   [Eighteenth century silhouette and support, covering mantuas, at the
    Metropolitan
    Museum](http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/18sil/hd_18sil.htm)
-   [Recreation of three mantuas, at Colonial
    Williamsburg](http://members.aol.com/williamsburgrose/1_Parlor.html)

[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:French
clothing](Category:French_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Gowns](Category:Gowns "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:Robes and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")

[1] Ribeiro, Aileen, on the origins of the mantua in the late 17th
century, in *Dress in Eighteenth Century Europe 1715–1789*; Ashelford,
Jane, *The Art of Dress*

[2] [Mantua dating to ca.
1720](https://collections.vam.ac.uk/objectid/O13810) in the Victoria and
Albert Museum collections.

[3] [1744 mantua worn by Isabella
Courtenay](https://collections.vam.ac.uk/objectid/O78803) in the
Victoria and Albert Museum collections.

[4] "Court dress \[British\] (C.I.65.13.1a-c)". In Heilbrunn Timeline of
Art History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000–.
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/eudr/ho_C.I.65.13.1a-c.htm> (October
2006)

[5] [Mantua dated to
1775–85](https://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O127173/mantua/) in the
Victoria & Albert Museum collections.

[6] Mantua \[British\] (33.54a,b)". In Heilbrunn Timeline of Art
History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000–.
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/eudr/ho_33.54a,b.htm> (October 2006)

[7] Waugh, Norah. The cut of women's clothes 1600–1930. London: Faber,
1968.

[8] [Lady Clapham's
Mantua](https://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O82504/dolls-mantua-lady-claphams-mantua/)
in the Victoria and Albert Museum collection.

[9] "Mantua \[English\] (1991.6.1a,b)". In Heilbrunn Timeline of Art
History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000–.
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ho/09/euwb/ho_1991.6.1a,b.htm> (October
2006)

[10] Arnold, Janet Patterns of Fashion 1: Englishwomen's dresses and
their construction, c. 1660–1860. New ed. London: Macmillan 1977.