![](Simar_Gamarelli_20050412.jpg "Simar_Gamarelli_20050412.jpg")

A **simar**, as defined in the [1913 *Webster's
Dictionary*](Webster's_Dictionary#1913_edition "wikilink"), is "a
woman's long dress or robe; also light covering; a scarf." The word is
derived from [French](French_language "wikilink") **simarre**, and is
also written as **cimar**, **cymar**, **samare**, and **simare**.

*[Collins English Dictionary](Collins_English_Dictionary "wikilink")*
defines "simar" and its variant "cymar" as "a woman's short fur-trimmed
jacket, popular in the 17th and 18th centuries".[1]

The form "cymar" was used by [John Dryden](John_Dryden "wikilink"): "Her
body shaded with a light cymar".[2] [Walter
Scott](Walter_Scott "wikilink") used the spelling "simarre": "her sable
tresses, which, each arranged in its own little spiral of twisted curls,
fell down upon as much of a lovely neck and bosom as a simarre of the
richest Persian silk, exhibiting flowers in their natural colors
embossed upon a purple ground, permitted to be visible".[3] [Gene
Wolfe](Gene_Wolfe "wikilink") describes the dress bought by Severian for
Dorcas as a "simar" made of raw, yellow-brown linen in his book [The
Shadow of the Torturer](The_Shadow_of_the_Torturer "wikilink").

In his 1909 book, *Costume of Prelates of the Catholic Church*, John
Abel Felix Prosper Nainfa proposed[4] the use of the English word
"simar", instead of the word "[cassock](cassock "wikilink")", for the
cassock with the [pellegrina](pellegrina "wikilink") (a shoulder cape
which is sometimes detachable) worn by Catholic clergy, which he treated
as distinct from the cassock proper. Others too have made the same
distinction between the "simar" (with pellegrina) and the "cassock"
(without), but many scholars disagree with Nainfa's distinction.[5] More
particularly, the documents of the [Holy See](Holy_See "wikilink") do
not make this distinction, and use the term "cassock" or "vestis
talaris" whether a pellegrina is attached or is not. Thus the
Instruction on the Dress, Titles and Coats-of-Arms of Cardinals, Bishops
and Lesser Prelates[6] of 28 March 1969 states that, for cardinals and
bishops, "the elbow-length cape, trimmed in the same manner as this
*cassock*, may be worn over it".[7] "Cassock", rather than "simar" is
the term that is usually applied to the dress of Popes and other
Catholic ecclesiastics. The Instruction also gives no support to
Nainfa's claim that the cassock with shoulder cape should not be worn in
church services. Nainfa wrote that the garment with the shoulder cape
was at that time called a *zimarra* in Italian. However, the Italian
term *zimarra* is today used rather of a historical loose-fitting
overgown, quite unlike the close-fitting cassock with shoulder cape worn
today by some Catholic clergy,[8][9] and similar to the fur-lined
[Schaube](:de:Schaube "wikilink") that was used in northern
Europe.[10][11] Images of the historical zimarra as worn by women can be
seen at "Dressing the Italian Way"[12] and "The Italian Showcase".[13]
On the ecclesiastical simar, as defined by Nainfa, see
[Cassock](Cassock "wikilink").

## See also

-   [Mantelletta](Mantelletta "wikilink")
-   [Mozzetta](Mozzetta "wikilink")

## References

[Category:History of clothing
(Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:Robes and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")
[Category:Catholic clerical
clothing](Category:Catholic_clerical_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7] [Instruction on the Dress, Titles and Coats-of-Arms of Cardinals,
Bishops and Lesser Prelates, 2 and
14](http://www.fiu.edu/~mirandas/instruction69.htm) (emphasis added)

[8] [Italy in the 16th
century](http://threadwalker.net/16c-italian-intro.html#timeline)

[9] See [zimarra](:it:Zimarra "wikilink")

[10] See the German-language article [Zimarra](:de:Zimarra "wikilink")

[11]

[12]

[13]