![](Crown_Prince_Akihito_&_Michiko_Shoda_Wedding_1959-4.jpg "fig:Crown_Prince_Akihito_&_Michiko_Shoda_Wedding_1959-4.jpg"),
then *Crown Prince*, newly-wed wearing a *sokutai* and holding a
*shaku*, 10 April 1959\]\] The is a complex attire worn only by
[courtiers](courtier "wikilink"), [aristocrats](Aristocracy "wikilink")
and the [emperor](Emperor_of_Japan "wikilink") at the
[Japanese](Japan "wikilink") imperial court. Parts of a *sokutai* are
the , a flat ritual baton or [sceptre](sceptre "wikilink"), and a hat
called . Sokutai differs from person to person depending on rank and
whether the person is a civil or military official. Military officers
wear the outermost layer with split front and back panels, to permit
freer movement, whereas civil officials have sewn panels. The highest
ranks (from first to third) wear purple; the fourth rank wears maroon;
fifth, crimson; sixth, dark green; seventh, light green; eighth, dark
blue; and the basic rank, light blue. Persons without rank typically
wear mud or light yellow; the darker, fuller shade of yellow was
reserved for the emperor. Due to the difficulty of obtaining the dyes
required to produce purple and maroon, these colours were changed to
black during the [Heian Period](Heian_Period "wikilink").

No longer in normal use, the *sokutai* is however still worn by male
[imperial court](Meiji_period "wikilink") members, including the
[Imperial family](Imperial_House_of_Japan "wikilink") and government
officials such as the [Prime
Minister](Prime_Minister_of_Japan "wikilink") on rare occasions, such as
[weddings](wedding "wikilink") and
[enthronement](Enthronement_of_the_Japanese_Emperor "wikilink")
ceremonies. On such occasions women such as an empress or princess wear
a [jūnihitoe](jūnihitoe "wikilink").

## Composition

On the foundation of a kosode (小袖), which is a white, slender garment
covering the wearer to knee level, the *Ookuchi-hakama*, a pair of red,
long hakama, is worn over the kosode and tied off on the wearer's left.
Then, the hitoe is worn as an upper garment; a number of layers of
*akome* is worn above the hitoe according to seasonal requirements. The
*ue-no-bakama*, a shorter, white hakama, with an open fly, is worn above
the *akome*, tied off to the right. The *shitagasane*, a garment
typically white, with the characteristic "tail" of the sokutai, the
covers the upper body of the wearer. Then, the *hampi*, a sleeveless
vest, often featuring intricate embroidery, is worn over all these
layers. The final outer robe is then worn over the *hampi*.

## External links

-   [The Costume Museum \| The Heian
    Period](http://www.iz2.or.jp/english/fukusyoku/wayou/index.htm)
-   [Encyclopædia Britannica:
    *Sokutai*](http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9068548/sokutai)

[Category:Japanese clothing](Category:Japanese_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Robes and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")