![](Erik_XIVs_kröningsmantel_från_1561-06-29_-_Livrustkammaren_-_56290.tif "fig:Erik_XIVs_kröningsmantel_från_1561-06-29_-_Livrustkammaren_-_56290.tif")
![](Kröningsmantel_av_purpurfärgad_sammet_-_Livrustkammaren_-_91426.tif "fig:Kröningsmantel_av_purpurfärgad_sammet_-_Livrustkammaren_-_91426.tif")
![](Arvfurstemantel_-_Livrustkammaren_-_51544.tif "fig:Arvfurstemantel_-_Livrustkammaren_-_51544.tif")
![](Gustav_IIIs_kröningskläder,_1751_-_Livrustkammaren_-_47786.tif "fig:Gustav_IIIs_kröningskläder,_1751_-_Livrustkammaren_-_47786.tif")

Several **Swedish coronation robes** from the 16th to the 19th century
are preserved at [The Royal Armoury](Livrustkammaren "wikilink") in
[Stockholm](Stockholm "wikilink"), [Sweden](Sweden "wikilink"). The
youngest one, [Oscar II](Oscar_II_of_Sweden "wikilink")'s robe
[coronation](coronation "wikilink") [robe](robe "wikilink") from 1873 is
in the Treasury at [Stockholm Palace](Stockholm_Palace "wikilink").

The oldest coronation robes are in a deep purple colour, which differes
from the more bright red colour that were in fashion from the 18th
century and onward. The purple colour was charged with symbolism and
reserved for the elite.[1]

The princely mantles, unlike the monarch's, were not purple but blue.
This type of mantle has been used by Swedish princes and princesses
since at least the 18th century.

## Royal mantles

### Eric XIV of Sweden

[Eric XIV](Eric_XIV_of_Sweden "wikilink")'s coronation robe is the
oldest garment that has been kept from a Swedish coronation. It is a
velvet robe in a deep purple colour. Originally the robe was decorated
with 455 golden crowns. The crowns are
[embroidered](embroidered "wikilink") with golden, white, blue and pink
silk, and on each crown ten small [pearls](pearl "wikilink") were
attached. Today only 296 of the crowns remain.[2] When king Eric was
crowned the robe also had a trimming and a collar made out of
[ermine](ermine "wikilink"). After Eric XIV, [John
III](John_III_of_Sweden "wikilink"), [Charles
IX](Charles_IX_of_Sweden "wikilink") and [Gustav II
Adolf](Gustavus_Adolphus_of_Sweden "wikilink") have used the robe during
their coronations.[3]

### Christina of Sweden

[Queen Christinas](Christina,_Queen_of_Sweden "wikilink") coronation
robe was ordered in Paris for the coronation in 1650. The blue and
violet, purple velvet robe was originally decorated with 764,5
embroidered crowns in gold, and sewn on pearls. Both the crowns and the
pearls were ripped out during the 18th century. The ermine collar and
trimming is also missing today.[4] The robe has also been worn by
[Charles XI](Charles_XI_of_Sweden "wikilink"), [Charles X
Gustav](Charles_X_Gustav_of_Sweden "wikilink") and [Charles
XII](Charles_XII_of_Sweden "wikilink"). The last one to be crowned in
Christina's robe was [Frederick I](Frederick_I_of_Sweden "wikilink") in
1720.[5]

### Ulrika Eleonora of Sweden

For [queen Ulrika Eleonora the
younger's](Ulrika_Eleonora,_Queen_of_Sweden "wikilink") coronation in
1718 a blue and violet, purple robe, originally made for Charles X
Gustav, was used. The decor consisted of golden flames and crowns. The
robe was also worn by [Hedwig
Eleonora](Hedwig_Eleonora_of_Holstein-Gottorp "wikilink") during her
son's, Charles XI's, coronation. The ermine lining was removed in
1770.[6]

### Adolf Frederick of Sweden

Adolf Frederick's coronation robe is made out of red and violet, purple
velvet and it was bought in Paris in 1751. It is decorated with groups
of crowns embroidered with gold and silver threads. The lining is made
of ermine, and the robe has been worn by [Gustav
III](Gustav_III_of_Sweden "wikilink"), [Gustav IV
Adolf](Gustav_IV_Adolf_of_Sweden "wikilink"), [Charles
XIII](Charles_XIII_of_Sweden "wikilink") and [Charles XIV
John](Charles_XIV_John_of_Sweden "wikilink") at their coronations. The
train was extended for the coronation of Gustav III in 1772.[7]

## Princely mantles

![](Furstlig_mantel.jpg "Furstlig_mantel.jpg")

At the Swedish court since the 18th century, there emerged the
distinction of using blue for princes and purple for the king; mantles,
boots and headgear followed this distinction. This distinction can be
observed at the coronation of King [Adolf
Frederick](Adolf_Frederick,_King_of_Sweden "wikilink") and Queen [Louisa
Ulrika](Louisa_Ulrika_of_Prussia "wikilink") in 1751: The king and queen
arrived at the ceremony wearing blue princely mantles and left wearing
the purple royal mantles.

The colour used for the mantle is described in the documents as *Bleu
Royal*, i.e. royal blue. The mantles themselves were worn until 1907,
during the state opening of the Riksdag. As King [Gustaf
V](Gustaf_V_of_Sweden "wikilink") would not undergo a coronation, the
practice of wearing the mantles, both royal and princely, stopped.
However, the royal mantle was still laid out over the silver throne at
solemn ceremonies, such as the Riksdag's formal opening until 1974.[8]

## References

## See also

-   [Regalia of Sweden](Regalia_of_Sweden "wikilink")

[Category:National symbols of
Sweden](Category:National_symbols_of_Sweden "wikilink")
[Category:Swedish monarchy](Category:Swedish_monarchy "wikilink")
[Category:Regalia](Category:Regalia "wikilink") [Category:Robes and
cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]