![](Frans_Hals_-_Portrait_of_Aletta_Hanemans_-_Mauritshuis_460.jpg "fig:Frans_Hals_-_Portrait_of_Aletta_Hanemans_-_Mauritshuis_460.jpg")
wearing a black vlieger with attached sleeves, by [Frans
Hals](Frans_Hals "wikilink")\]\] A **vlieger** is a type of sleeveless
over-gown or cape worn by women in the late 16th and early
17th-centuries.[1] Variations with short sleeves or high shoulder rolls
are known.[2] Sometimes sleeves were attached with aiglets, and often
slits were made to allow belts or the hands to pass through.[3]

In the Netherlands the vlieger was often worn with a millstone collar (a
wide starched [ruff](Ruff_(clothing) "wikilink")).[4] The vlieger was
always worn with a skirt with a [fardegalijn](Farthingale "wikilink").
In cold weather it could be buttoned shut, though the Spanish version,
called a "ropa" could only be closed at the neck.

The Spanish version was called a "ropa" and the French version was
called a "marlotte".[5]

<File:Anthonis> Mor Margaret of Parma c 1559.jpg\|Margaret of Parma with
ropa, c 1559 <File:Infanta> Caterina of Spain.jpg\|Infanta Caterina with
ropa, c. 1552 <File:Herman> van der Mast - Portrait of a woman aged 24
in 1587.jpg\|A woman aged 24 with vlieger, 1587 <File:Anonymous> French
Artist - Portrait of an unknown French Noblewoman - Google Art
Project.jpg\|French Noblewoman with marlotte, 1560-9

## References

[Category:Robes and cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")
[Category:16th-century
fashion](Category:16th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] [20,000 Years of Fashion](20,000_Years_of_Fashion "wikilink"): The
History of Costume and Personal Adornment, by [Francois Boucher (art
historian)](Francois_Boucher_(art_historian) "wikilink") & [Yvonne
Deslandres](Yvonne_Deslandres "wikilink"), 1987, pp. 224-225