**Bell-bottoms** (or **flares**) are a style of
[trousers](trousers "wikilink") that become wider from the
[knees](knee "wikilink") downward, forming a bell-like shape of the
trouser leg.

## History

### Naval origins

![](Sailors1854.jpg "fig:Sailors1854.jpg") In the early 19th century,
when a standardized uniform did not yet exist in the [U.S.
Navy](U.S._Navy "wikilink"), some sailors adopted a style of wide
trousers ending in bell-shaped cuffs.[1][2][3] In 1813, one of the first
recorded descriptions of [sailors](sailor "wikilink")' uniforms, written
by [Commodore](Commodore_(USN) "wikilink") [Stephen
Decatur](Stephen_Decatur "wikilink"), noted that the men on the frigates
*United States* and *Macedonia* were wearing "glazed
[canvas](canvas "wikilink") [hats](hat "wikilink") with stiff brims,
decked with streamers of [ribbon](ribbon "wikilink"), blue jackets
buttoned loosely over [waistcoats](waistcoat "wikilink"), and blue
trousers with bell bottoms."[4]

The British [Royal Navy](Royal_Navy "wikilink") had often been a leader
in nautical fashion, but bell-bottoms did not become part of the
standard uniform until the mid-19th century.[5] These "bell-bottoms"
were often just very wide-legged trousers, rather than shaped trousers
that flared below the knee.[6] They continued in use as a distinctive
feature of the RN rating's "[square rig](square_rig "wikilink")" uniform
until replaced by more conventionally flared trousers in 1977.[7]

Although the trousers of the present-day uniform of the [United States
Navy](United_States_Navy "wikilink") are still referred to as
"bell-bottomed", they simply have large straight legs. The wearer's
thigh fills the upper trouser leg, making the bottom of the pants leg
appear flared. This style has been popular for many years, perhaps
originally because the trouser leg can be rolled up easily, allowing the
wearer to work in bare feet, but there is no reliable documentation that
confirms a specific timeline or reason for the popularity of
bell-bottomed trousers in naval apparel.[8][9]

### 1960s, 1970s, 1980s and 1990s

In the 1960s, bell-bottoms became fashionable for both men and women in
Europe and North America.[10] Often made of denim, they flared out from
the bottom of the calf, and had slightly curved hems and a circumference
of at the bottom of each leg opening. They were usually worn with
[Cuban-heeled](High-heeled_footwear#Men_and_heels "wikilink") shoes,
[clogs](Clog_(shoe) "wikilink"), or [Chelsea
boots](Chelsea_boot "wikilink"). [Toni Basil](Toni_Basil "wikilink"),
who was a [go-go dancer](go-go_dancing "wikilink") when the 1964 concert
film the *[T.A.M.I. Show](T.A.M.I._Show "wikilink")* was released,
appeared in the film wearing bell-bottoms with a baby doll blouse.

![](Redhead_Beach_Bell_Bottoms.jpg "fig:Redhead_Beach_Bell_Bottoms.jpg")
Bell-bottoms are mentioned in the popular 1971 music single "[Bell
Bottom
Blues](Bell_Bottom_Blues_(Derek_and_the_Dominos_song) "wikilink")" by
blues-rock group [Derek and the
Dominos](Derek_and_the_Dominos "wikilink").

In the 1970s, bell-bottoms moved back into mainstream fashion;[11]
[Sonny and Cher](Sonny_and_Cher "wikilink") helped popularize
bell-bottoms in the US by wearing them on [their popular television
show](The_Sonny_&_Cher_Comedy_Hour "wikilink").[12] The pants were
typically flared from the knee down, with bottom leg openings of up to
twenty-six inches. Made from denim, bright cotton and satin polyester,
they were so popular that they became a symbol of the outlandish and
colorful style of the decade.[13]

*Loon pants* (shortened from "balloon pants") were a variant on
bell-bottomed trousers, with an increased flare. They were worn
occasionally by go-go dancers on the British television music variety
show *[Ready Steady Go!](Ready_Steady_Go! "wikilink")* in 1966.

*Elephant bells*, popular in the mid-to-late 1970s, were similar to loon
pants, but were typically made of [denim](denim "wikilink"). Elephant
bells had a marked flare below the knee, often covering the wearer's
shoes. The preferred shoes were [platform
shoes](platform_shoes "wikilink") with [soles](sole_(shoe) "wikilink")
at least thick and heels to keep the pants' hems off the ground.

After the rise of [punk rock](punk_rock "wikilink") in the late 1970s,
bell-bottoms began to become less-fashionable as the decade drew to a
close. By 1979, skin-tight trousers or 1950s-style drain pipes were much
more in vogue, with bell-bottoms been seen as having had their day,
remaining in fashion circa 1968-78.[14]

A revival of bell-bottoms occurred after bands such as [The Stone
Roses](The_Stone_Roses "wikilink"), [Happy
Mondays](Happy_Mondays "wikilink") and [The
Charlatans](The_Charlatans_(UK_band) "wikilink") re-introduced them in
late 1989 and the early 1990s.

### Mid-1990s to 2000s

In 1996, women's bell-bottoms were reintroduced to the mainstream
public, under the name "boot-cut" ("boot-fit") trousers as the flare was
slimmer.[15] By 1999, flare jeans had come into vogue among women,[16]
which had a wider, more exaggerated flare than boot-cuts (boot-fits).
The boot-cut (boot-fit) style ended up dominating the fashion world for
10 years.[17]

By around 2006, the bell-shaped silhouette started to fade as the skinny
jean rose in popularity.[18] [Sharon Haver](Sharon_Haver "wikilink"),
the founder and editor-in-chief of [online fashion
magazine](Online_magazine "wikilink") *FocusOnStyle.com*, commented
"It's as if all the girls wearing premium boot-cut (boot-fit) jeans
threw them away one day, and the next day began wearing skinny jeans and
flats."[19]

However, boot-cuts (boot-fits) and flare jeans never entirely went away,
and both of these styles remain relatively popular today both in denim
fashion and higher-quality office wear. Bell-bottomed jeans remain
popular today among modern Scandinavian youth.

Women's boot-cut jeans are tighter at the knee than men's, and flare out
from knee to hem. Men's styles are traditionally straight-legged,
although the pants came in a more flared style in the early and mid
2000s, but this was optional. The bell-bottoms of the 1960s and 1970s
can be distinguished from the flare or boot-cut (boot-fit) of the 1990s
and 2000s by the tightness of the fabric at the knee.

## See also

-   [Phat pants](Phat_pants "wikilink")
-   [Wide leg jeans](Wide_leg_jeans "wikilink")
-   [Bell sleeve](Bell_sleeve "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Hippie movement](Category:Hippie_movement "wikilink")
[Category:1960s fads and
trends](Category:1960s_fads_and_trends "wikilink") [Category:1970s fads
and trends](Category:1970s_fads_and_trends "wikilink") [Category:Jeans
by type](Category:Jeans_by_type "wikilink") [Category:American
fashion](Category:American_fashion "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1960s fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1970s fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1990s fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2000s fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:1980s fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7] Imperial War Museum
<http://www.iwm.org.uk/collections/item/object/30090214>

[8]

[9] NavPers 15665D.

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14] [The Guardian - the history of
flares](https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/jan/24/the-history-of-flares-in-pictures)

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]