**Boardshorts** are a type of swimwear and casual wear in the form of
relatively long (approximately knee length) loose-fitting
[shorts](shorts "wikilink") that are designed to be quick-drying and are
generally made from strong and smooth [polyester](polyester "wikilink")
or [nylon](nylon "wikilink") material. Originally known as **surf
trunks**, later as **[Jams](Jams_(clothing_line) "wikilink")**, and
occasionally in [British English](British_English "wikilink") as **swim
shorts**, boardshorts are a style of men's[1] and, more recently,
women's[2] summerwear.

Boardshorts have evolved over the last 50 years and separated themselves
from the simpler swim trunks category from which they originated. In the
beginning of their history, change happened organically – individual
solutions were born out of the need to address environmental
requirements and inadequacies in a garment that was increasingly used
specifically for surfing. Although they are now considered a popular
form of general beachwear, much of today's mass consumer acceptance is
based on competing brands marketing themselves as being authentic due to
their historical roots within the surfing lifestyle and their product's
technical authority.[3]

The name "boardshorts" is based on their use in aquatic sports that use
a board, such as [surfing](surfing "wikilink"). They are also sometimes
called "boardies" in [slang](slang "wikilink"), especially in
[Australia](Australia "wikilink"), and "baggies" in [South
Africa](South_Africa "wikilink").

Boardshorts are especially popular in [North
America](North_America "wikilink") and spread beyond surfing especially
as the [skater punk](skater_punk "wikilink") fashion trend got underway.
They are also typically worn in men's [beach
volleyball](beach_volleyball "wikilink"). They are less popular in other
parts of the world, where other suit styles are preferred.

## Use and design

![](Freeballer_board_shorts_01.jpg "Freeballer_board_shorts_01.jpg")

Boardshorts are designed to be quick-drying, and are generally made from
strong and smooth [polyester](polyester "wikilink") or
[nylon](nylon "wikilink") material. They are durable and hold up to wear
from contact with a [surfboard](surfboard "wikilink"), yet are
comfortable and light-weight. They are well-adapted to use in various
active watersports.

Boardshorts do not have an elastic waist like many swim shorts do;
instead they have a more rigid waistband which opens at the front, often
with a [velcro](velcro "wikilink") fly. The waistband is also held
together at the front with a lace-up tie. This double
[fail-safe](fail-safe "wikilink") system is in order to ensure that the
shorts cannot be pulled off the body by the force of the wave when a
surfer is tumbled under water during a
[wipeout](Wipe_out_(surfing)#Accidental "wikilink"). Another common
feature of authentic surfing boardshort design is a very small pocket
sealed with velcro and vented with a [grommet](grommet "wikilink"). This
is designed to be a secure place to carry a car key, house key, or hotel
key card while in the water. Boardshorts traditionally have no lining,
unlike traditional swim shorts.

Boardshorts are normally longer than many [shorts](shorts "wikilink") or
form-fitting [speedo styles](Speedo_(suit_style) "wikilink") of
swimwear, and often (other than the waist) they have a loose or
[baggy](baggy "wikilink") appearance. The major reason for the extra
length is to protect the wearer's legs from wax on the board. Surfboards
are covered with a layer of sticky wax, which allows the surfer to stand
on the board without slipping off. However, this [wax can rip leg hair
off](Waxing "wikilink") a surfer when sitting on the board waiting for
waves. Long boardshorts cover the back of the leg when sitting on the
board, preventing the wax from ripping out the leg hair. The length of
boardshorts is also affected by fashion trends; the length can range
from mid-thigh (old school) to below the knee, covering the entire knee.
In the 2000s, boardshorts were often [worn low in the
back](Sagging_(fashion) "wikilink"), exposing the top of the
[buttocks.](Cleavage_(buttocks) "wikilink") Many designs of board shorts
use vibrant color, striking patterns including Hawaiian floral images,
and highlighted stitching; however not all boardshorts have these
features.

Although the basic design for boardshorts remains largely the same, some
manufacturers have taken advantage of new technology. Because surfers
and other water-sports enthusiasts commonly wear boardshorts without
underwear, one of the major complaints has been about the use of
[velcro](velcro "wikilink") for the fly closure which tends to entangle
[pubic hair](pubic_hair "wikilink"). A solution that some manufactures
have come up with is to use a [neoprene](neoprene "wikilink") fly, which
does not allow the fly to completely open, but provides enough stretch
so that the shorts can be easily pulled on and off. Pubic hair does not
get caught on the neoprene fly. To remedy another common complaint,
about boardshorts stitching in the inseam area which would rub directly
against the wearer's skin, many manufacturers switched to a seamless
design, or use welding or glue, rather than stitches. Although it is
very common for boardshorts to be worn without underwear, some male
wearers prefer to wear [compression
shorts](compression_shorts "wikilink"),
[boxers](boxer_shorts "wikilink"), a [jockstrap](jockstrap "wikilink")
or [briefs](briefs "wikilink") under them. Some female surfers wear a
swimsuit or bikini bottom under boardshorts.

Some style of [Mixed Martial Arts](Mixed_Martial_Arts "wikilink") shorts
were developed from boardshorts. Men's physique class in the [National
Physique Committee](National_Physique_Committee "wikilink") also uses
boardshorts for onstage competition.

Almost all [swimsuit](swimsuit "wikilink") manufacturers and many
designer brands now produce boardshorts. There are even
boardshort-specific retailers, which offer an assortment of boardshorts
to the [surfing](surfing "wikilink") and
[wakeboarding](wakeboarding "wikilink") public.

## References

[el:Βερμούδα](el:Βερμούδα "wikilink")
[pl:Kąpielówki](pl:Kąpielówki "wikilink")
[pt:Bermuda](pt:Bermuda "wikilink") [sl:Hlače
bermuda](sl:Hlače_bermuda "wikilink")

[Category:Swimsuits](Category:Swimsuits "wikilink") [Category:Trousers
and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:Australian fashion](Category:Australian_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Australian clothing](Category:Australian_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]