![](Cargo_pants_001.jpg "fig:Cargo_pants_001.jpg") **Cargo pants** or
**cargo trousers**, also sometimes called **combat trousers** (or
**combat pants**) after their original military purpose,[1] are loosely
cut [pants](trousers "wikilink") originally designed for tough, outdoor
activities, and whose design is distinguished by one or more cargo
pockets. Cargo pants have become popular in urban areas as well, since
they are convenient for carrying items during day trips on foot.

**Cargo shorts** are a [shorts](shorts "wikilink")-length version.

## Description

A cargo pocket is a form of a [patch pocket](patch_pocket "wikilink"),
often with accordion folds for increased capacity closed with a flap
secured by [snap](snap_fastener "wikilink"),
[button](Button_(clothing) "wikilink"), [magnet](magnet "wikilink"), or
[Velcro](Velcro "wikilink") common on
[battledress](battledress "wikilink") and hunting clothing. In some
designs, cargo pockets may be hidden within the legs.
![](Cargo_Shorts_2018.jpg "fig:Cargo_Shorts_2018.jpg") Cargo pants are
made of hard wearing fabric and ruggedly stitched. Increasingly they are
made of quick-drying synthetic or cotton-synthetic blends, and often
feature oversized belt loops to accommodate wide webbing belts.

The garments are characteristically designed to allow bending at the
knee and hip, and are sewn with [felled seams](felled_seam "wikilink")
for strength and durability.

## History

[Battle Dress](Battle_Dress "wikilink") were first worn by members of
the [British Armed Forces](British_Armed_Forces "wikilink") in 1938, and
were introduced to the [United States](United_States "wikilink") in the
mid-1940s during [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"). The large
pockets characteristic of cargo pants were originally designed for
British forces to hold [field
dressings](Field_dressing_(bandage) "wikilink"), maps, and other items.
The concept was copied in the U.S. [Paratrooper](Paratrooper "wikilink")
uniform to allow more room to hold [K rations](K_rations "wikilink") and
extra [ammunition](ammunition "wikilink").[2]

## Variations

![](Hue_Vietnam_Citadel-of-Huế-21_-_Cargo_shorts_crop.jpg "Hue_Vietnam_Citadel-of-Huế-21_-_Cargo_shorts_crop.jpg")

### Cargo shorts

**Cargo shorts** are cargo pants [shortened](shorts "wikilink") at the
knee. Some cargo pants are made with removable lower legs allowing
conversion into shorts.

In 1980 cargo shorts were marketed as ideal for the sportsman or
fisherman, with the pocket flaps ensuring that pocket contents were
secure and unlikely to fall out.[3] By the mid-to-late 1990s cargo
shorts found popularity among mainstream men's fashion.[4] In 2012, [Tim
Gunn](Tim_Gunn "wikilink") observed that while the pockets were
undeniably useful for carrying things for work or other everyday tools,
cargo shorts were more practical than elegant.[5]

### EMT pants

EMT pants are cargo pants with six-way cargo/scissor pockets on one or
both legs, each with a hidden zippered pocket on top of cargo pocket, a
bellowed flap pocket with increased carrying capacity, [besom
pockets](besom_pocket "wikilink") on calves for glove storage, and three
slots for scissors (two fitted with snap closures).

## See also

-   [Tactical pants](Tactical_pants "wikilink")
-   [Khaki](Khaki "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:1990s fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2000s fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] Hong, Nicole [Nice Cargo Shorts! You’re Sleeping on the
Sofa](https://www.wsj.com/articles/nice-cargo-shorts-youre-sleeping-on-the-sofa-1470082856)
*Wall Street Journal*. 3 August 2016

[5]