**Carpenter jeans** are [jeans](jeans "wikilink") with many pockets and
loops which can be used to carry objects such as tools and are often
loose around the [leg](human_leg "wikilink") to be able to accommodate
the affixed items. They are often worn by construction workers and
[carpenters](carpenter "wikilink"), hence the name, to carry their tools
so that their hands can be kept free yet the tools are still easily
accessible. Referring to carpenter jeans something white collar workers
would never need or know about. A loop of cloth is placed on the left
pant leg just below the hip and sewn in for holding various tools such
as hammers or paint brushes ect. This particular addition to carpenter
pant leg, rather dunsil In this day and age where other means of
additional tool adapters are more useful the pant loop has become simply
a fashion statement to describe a stereotype of clothing and
functionally useless.

## Characteristics

Carpenter jeans are usually made of blue [denim](denim "wikilink").
[Canvas](Canvas "wikilink") may be the material in more durable styles,
and colours may vary; white and beige are other popular colours. A
'hammer loop' is usually located on the left leg; although this was
originally designed to be useful, most carpenters do not use the loop,
because the hammer often falls out or bangs around the leg. Other
features include extra pockets, sometimes located on the outer thighs,
and extra rivets for durability. Another feature is wider belt loops, to
accommodate a wider, thicker [belt](belt_(clothing) "wikilink"). Because
of the weight of the tools carried in the pockets and loops, a tightly
cinched, wide 'work belt' must be worn by most people.

Most carpenter jeans are made for function, not fashion, and are usually
of a softer denim than the original utilitarian jeans, with a looser
fit. Carpenter jeans were quite popular in the late 1990s and early
2000s [hip hop scene](Hip_hop_fashion "wikilink") especially those by
the [Tommy Hilfiger](Tommy_Hilfiger "wikilink") brand who placed their
trademark logo on the hammer loop.

## References

[Category:Jeans by type](Category:Jeans_by_type "wikilink")
[Category:Workwear](Category:Workwear "wikilink") [Category:Trousers and
shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")