![](Chaps_-_colour_isolated.jpg "Chaps_-_colour_isolated.jpg")

**Chaps** ( or ) are sturdy coverings for the legs consisting of
leggings and a belt. They are buckled on over
[trousers](trousers "wikilink") with the chaps' integrated belt, but
unlike trousers they have no seat and are not joined at the crotch. They
are designed to provide protection for the legs and are usually made of
[leather](leather "wikilink") or a leather-like material. Their name is
a shortened version of the Spanish word *chaparreras*. *Chaparreras*
were named after the chaparral (thick, thorny, low brush) from which
they were designed to protect the legs while riding on horseback. Like
much of western horse culture, the origin of *chaparreras* was in the
part of [New Spain](New_Spain "wikilink") that later became
[Mexico](Mexico "wikilink"), and has been assimilated into
[cowboy](cowboy "wikilink") culture of the American west. They are a
protective garment to be used when riding a [horse](horse "wikilink")
through brushy terrain. In the modern world, they are worn for both
practical work purposes and for exhibition or show use. Chaps have also
been adopted for use on motorcycles, particularly by
[Harley-Davidson](Harley-Davidson "wikilink") riders and other
cruiser-style motorcycle riders.

## History

![](Cowboy.1887.ws.jpg "fig:Cowboy.1887.ws.jpg") The earliest form of
protective leather garment used by mounted riders who herded cattle in
Spain and Mexico were called *armas*, meaning "weapons". They were
essentially two large pieces of [cowhide](cowhide "wikilink") that were
used as a protective apron of sorts. They attached to the horn of the
rider's [stock saddle](western_saddle "wikilink"), and were spread
across both the horse's chest and the rider's legs. From this early and
rather cumbersome design came modifications that placed the garment
entirely on the rider, and then style variations adapted as
*[vaqueros](vaquero "wikilink")*, and later
[cowboys](cowboy "wikilink"), moved north from Mexico into the Pacific
coast and northern Rockies regions of what today are the United States
and Canada. There is also evidence that certain design features may
derive from the [mountain men](mountain_men "wikilink"), who copied them
from the leggings worn by [Native
Americans](Indigenous_people_of_the_United_States "wikilink").[1]
Different styles developed to fit local climate, terrain and hazards.[2]
Designs were also modified for purely stylistic and decorative purposes.
The time of actual appearance of the garment on American cowboys is
uncertain. By the late 1870s, however, most Texas cowboys wore them as
the cattle industry moved north.[3] By 1884, the [Dictionary of American
Regional English](Dictionary_of_American_Regional_English "wikilink")
notes use of the word in Wyoming, spelled "schaps."[4]

The word *chaps* is a [clip](clipping_(morphology) "wikilink") of
*chaparejos* or *chaparreras*,[5] which are Mexican Spanish words for
this garment, ultimately derived from Spanish *chaparro*,[6] one
[sense](Sense_and_reference "wikilink") of which is a low growing
thicket—difficult to ride through without damage to clothing. In
English, the word has two common pronunciations: and . Since at least
the end of the 19th century, in the western United States and Canada,
English-speaking riders have tended to pronounce the word .[7][8] This
pronunciation is also used among rodeo riders in New Zealand.[9]
English-speaking riders in the eastern United States and Canada,
Australia, and the United Kingdom have tended to pronounce the word
.[10][11]

## Equestrian chaps

![](Broncobuster3.jpg "fig:Broncobuster3.jpg")
![](Reining_spin.jpg "fig:Reining_spin.jpg") horse\]\] **Shotgun**
chaps, sometimes called "stovepipes", were so named because the legs are
straight and narrow. They were the earliest design used by Texas
cowboys, in wide use by the late 1870s.[12] Each leg is cut from a
single piece of leather. Their fit is snug, wrapping completely around
the leg. They have full-length zippers running along the outside of the
leg from the thigh to just above the ankle.[13] The edge of each legging
is usually fringed and the bottom is sometimes cut with an arch or flare
that allows a smooth fit over the arch of a boot. Shotguns do not flap
around the way the batwing design can, and they are also better at
trapping body heat, an advantage in windy, snowy or cold conditions,
though unpleasant in very hot or humid weather. Shotgun chaps are more
common on ranches in the northwest, [Rocky
Mountains](Rocky_Mountains "wikilink") and northern plains states, as
well as Canada,[14] and are the design most commonly seen in [horse
show](horse_show "wikilink") competition for [western
riders](western_riding "wikilink"), especially western
[equitation](equitation "wikilink"). [English
riders](English_riding "wikilink") who wear full-length chaps also
usually wear a shotgun style, sometimes without fringe.

**Batwing** chaps are cut wide with a flare at the bottom. Generally
made of smooth leather, they have only two or three fasteners around the
thigh, thus allowing great freedom of movement for the lower leg. This
is helpful when riding very actively, and makes it easier to mount the
horse. This design also provides more air circulation and is thus
somewhat cooler for hot-weather wear. Batwing chaps are often seen on
[rodeo](rodeo "wikilink") contestants, particularly those who ride
bucking stock. They are also seen on working
[ranches](ranch "wikilink"), particularly in
[Texas](Texas "wikilink").[15] They were a later design, developed after
the end of the [open range](open_range "wikilink").[16] Although by
definition the chaps that rodeo contestants wear are considered batwing
chaps, contestants do not refer to them as batwings. They are simply
called rodeo chaps. There are a few differences in design between
working ranch batwing chaps and rodeo chaps. Rodeo chaps are usually
more colorful and decorated, whereas ranch cowboys need toughness over
style. Rodeo chaps have long flowing fringe which can be the same or a
different color as the main body. Ranch chaps may be customized with a
brand or initials and some floral tooling, but never have fringe.
![](Chinks.JPG "fig:Chinks.JPG") **Chinks** are half-length chaps that
stop two to four inches (5 to 10 cm) below the knee, with very long
fringe at the bottom and along the sides. They are usually fringed along
the outside edge and bottom, making their apparent length appear about 4
inches (10 cm) longer. The leg shape is cut somewhere between batwings
and shotguns, and each leg usually has only two fasteners, high on the
thigh. They are cooler to wear and hence a design that is suitable for
very warm climates. They are occasionally called "half-chaps"[17] (not
to be confused with [gaiters](gaiters "wikilink")-style half chaps
described *below*). The original [etymon](etymon "wikilink") may have
been *chincaderos* or *chigaderos.* and may have originally referred to
*armitas.*[18] Chinks are most often seen on
[cowboys](cowboy "wikilink") in the
[Southwestern](Southwestern_United_States "wikilink") and Pacific
states, most notably on those who follow the California *vaquero* or
"[buckaroo](cowboy "wikilink")" tradition.[19]

**Armitas** are an early style of chaps, developed by the Spanish in
colonial Mexico and became associated with the "buckaroos" or vaqueros
of the [Great Basin](Great_Basin "wikilink") area of what is now the
United States. They are a short legging with completely closed legs that
have to be put on in a manner similar to pants. They are sometimes a bit
longer than chinks, but still stopping above the top of the boot,
fringed on the sides and on the bottom to reach the boot tops, attached
by a fringed belt.[20]

A **farrier's apron** is a specialized style of chinks without fringe,
also known as horse shoeing chaps. They protect the upper legs of
[farriers](farrier "wikilink") from getting scratched or cut up in the
process of shoeing or otherwise treating the hooves of horses. Some
designs have a breakaway front for safety while working.[21] Farrier's
aprons are also sometimes used by ranch hands when stacking
[hay](hay "wikilink") to reduce wear on clothing.
![](Cowboy_Morgan_Evans_at_age_14.jpg "fig:Cowboy_Morgan_Evans_at_age_14.jpg")

**Woolies** are a variation on shotgun chaps, made with a
[fleece](Sheepskin "wikilink") or with hair-on cowhide, often
[angora](Angora_wool "wikilink"), lined with canvas on the inside. They
are the warmest chaps, associated with the northern plains and [Rocky
Mountains](Rocky_Mountains "wikilink").[22] They appeared on the Great
Plains somewhere around 1887.[23][24]

**Zamorros** somewhat resemble batwing chaps, in that the leggings are
closely fitted at the thigh and flare out below the knee, but unlike
batwings, the leggings extend far below the boot with a distinctive
triangular flare.[25] Zamorros are commonly made of
[cowhide](cowhide "wikilink"), either plain tanned leather or hides with
the hair on. They are popular with [Paso Fino](Paso_Fino "wikilink")
aficionados, and are derived from styles seen in
[Colombia](Colombia "wikilink").[26] Historically, the word *zamorros*
simply referred to a basic shotgun-like style of either smooth or
hair-on chaps worn by Colombian riders.[27]

### European variations

![](Corrida_with_horse.jpg "fig:Corrida_with_horse.jpg") Chaps worn by
[campinos](campino "wikilink") in Portugal during the 1950s were
sheepskin or goatskin with the wool or hair on and of a "drainpipe"
style, while in Spain, chaps were without hair and feature intricately
worked designs called "poker-work."[28] In Spain today,
[rejoneadores](rejoneador "wikilink") wear smooth chaps attached with a
single strap behind the knee.

### Uses

Chaps are intended to protect the legs of [cowboys](cowboy "wikilink")
from contact with daily environmental hazards seen in working with
[cattle](cattle "wikilink"), [horses](horse "wikilink") and other
livestock. They help to protect riders' legs from scraping on brush,
injury from [thorns](Thorns,_spines,_and_prickles "wikilink") of
[cacti](cactus "wikilink"), [sagebrush](sagebrush "wikilink"),
[mesquite](mesquite "wikilink") and other thorny vegetation. Chaps are
also useful for other types of riding. Leather chaps stick to a leather
saddle or a bareback horse better than do fabric trousers and thus help
the rider stay on. They are worn by [rodeo](rodeo "wikilink")
competitors in "rough stock" events, including [bull
riding](bull_riding "wikilink"), [saddle bronc and bareback
riding](saddle_bronc_and_bareback_riding "wikilink"). Riders in other
disciplines, including various styles of [English
riding](English_riding "wikilink"), sometimes wear chaps while schooling
horses.[29]

Chaps are commonly worn by [western riders](western_riding "wikilink")
at [horse shows](horse_show "wikilink"), where contestants are required
to adhere to traditional forms of clothing, albeit with more decorative
touches than seen in working designs. Chaps are often required by show
rules,[30] and even when optional under the rules are often worn to give
a "finished" look to an outfit. Fashions change periodically and styles
vary between the assorted sub-disciplines within western-style riding.

## Non-equestrian chaps

![](Chainsaw_cutting_tree.jpg "fig:Chainsaw_cutting_tree.jpg")
![](Kitty_chaps.jpg "fig:Kitty_chaps.jpg") Chainsaw chaps are a
component of [chainsaw safety
clothing](chainsaw_safety_clothing "wikilink"). They are made of strong
materials like [kevlar](kevlar "wikilink") and protect the legs from
injury. A similar style, though of different materials, is sold to
[hunters](hunter "wikilink") and other outdoor sportsmen for protection
from [rattlesnake](rattlesnake "wikilink") bites.[31] Outside of snake
country, bird hunters often wear "upland chaps" made of [waxed
cotton](waxed_cotton "wikilink") or [nylon](nylon "wikilink") to protect
their legs from briars and thorns. Use of upland chaps allows any type
of [pants](trousers "wikilink") to be worn in the field and they are
also used to protect rain suits.[32]

Motorcycle chaps are a type of [motorcycle safety
clothing](motorcycle_safety_clothing "wikilink") and are an example of
the shotgun style. They are usually made of leather with the smooth side
out, and generally provide all-around protection for the leg and have
side zippers to allow them to be put on easily. They are popular in the
[biker](motorcycle "wikilink") [subculture](subcultures "wikilink"),
providing protection from the wind and cold as well as partial
protection from cuts and scrapes in the event of a fall to the
roadway.[33]

Chaps are also popular in [fetish fashion](fetish_fashion "wikilink")
and the [leather subculture](leather_subculture "wikilink"), where they
often are tightly fitted and worn without jeans or other garments
layered beneath them other than a [codpiece](codpiece "wikilink"). They
can be made of leather, patent leather, rubber, or vinyl and are worn
for decoration serving no protective purpose. Worn in this manner, they
are colloquially referred to as "assless" chaps, despite the redundancy
of the term.

## Materials and construction

![](ShowChaps.jpg "fig:ShowChaps.jpg") use. Left leg is closed as it
would be when worn, right leg is opened out to show construction.\]\]
Equestrian chaps, with the exception of woolies, are traditionally made
of [cowhide](cowhide "wikilink").[34] Woolies, some Zamorros, and a few
other historic or ethnic styles may be made with the hair or wool still
on the hide, usually cowhide, sheepskin, or [Angora
goat](Angora_goat "wikilink") skin. Historically, they also included
seal, bear, and buffalo.

Leather for chaps is tanned and dyed, and the hide is usually "split" so
that the leather is supple and can be made into a garment that allows
easy movement. There is a rough side, what is today called
[suede](suede "wikilink") or "roughout", and a smooth side. Chaps are
made in both "roughout" and "smooth out" (smooth side out) designs. Most
batwings and chinks are made smooth side out, most shotguns are suede,
or roughout. For [horse shows](horse_show "wikilink"), where fashions
may change from year to year and durability is not as great a concern,
lighter, synthetic materials such as [ultrasuede](ultrasuede "wikilink")
and vinyl may be used, though leather suede or a smooth split
predominates due to durability and proper fit.[35] In Australia, chaps
may be made of [oilskin](oilskin "wikilink") rather than leather.[36]

Most chaps, with the exception of Armitas (which have no metal parts),
usually have a small metal buckle in front to attach around the waist,
and have lacing on the back of the belt area to allow adjustment in
size. A few designs lace in the front and buckle in the back, but they
are not often seen. The sides of some designs, particularly the batwing
style, either have straps and relatively small metal buckles or snaps to
attach the legging around the rider's leg. Other styles, particularly
shotguns, usually use full-length heavy-duty metal zippers. Some
historic styles of riding chaps used a single break-away leather string
or lace instead of a front buckle.[37] The original purpose was to break
away if a rider's chaps' belt somehow became hooked over the saddle
horn.[38]

Except for the batwing design, most chaps are fringed along the edge of
the leg, usually a fringe of the same leather as the legging, though
occasionally a contrasting color of leather may be added. Chinks and
Armitas have fringe on the bottom of the leg as well. The belt that
holds on a pair of the chaps may be the same color of leather or of a
contrasting color, sometimes is fringed in the back for show, but
usually not on a working outfit. Decorative leather designs or fancy
stitching may be added along the edge of bottom of the leg or to the
belt, and even [sterling silver](sterling_silver "wikilink") pieces may
be used for buckles, and on round decorative metal conchos placed to
cover the lacing on the back of the belt, or occasionally even at the
bottom of the legging, by the heel.

## Half chaps

![](HalfChaps2.jpg "fig:HalfChaps2.jpg")s\]\] Half chaps, also known as
chapettes, are a popular style of equestrian
[gaiters](gaiters "wikilink") that extend from the ankle to just below
the knee. When worn over a [short paddock boot](jodhpur_boot "wikilink")
they give the protection and some of the appearance of a [tall riding
boot](riding_boots "wikilink"), but at lower cost. They are widely worn
by children in [horse shows](horse_show "wikilink") and by [trail
riders](trail_riding "wikilink"). Half chaps usually are made of
leather, and have a [zipper](zipper "wikilink") or [hook and
loop](hook_and_loop "wikilink") closure on the outside. They provide
grip for the rider, and protection from sweat and the [stirrup
leather](stirrup_leather "wikilink"). They are commonly used over the
paddock boots of [English-style](English_riding "wikilink") riders in
place of tall boots. While not true chaps, some
[Western-style](Western_riding "wikilink") riders use half chaps,
particularly in hot weather, but gaiter-style half chaps are not
traditional [cowboy](cowboy "wikilink") gear.

## Fitting

Chaps are usually worn over [denim](denim "wikilink")
[jeans](jeans "wikilink") or other trousers of heavy material. They have
their own belt, and usually are fitted around the hips, resting below
the belt loops of the trousers. Except for chinks and armitas, which are
designed to fit above the boot, most chaps are long, fitting over the
boot and draping slightly over the vamp of the boot (see
[shoe](shoe "wikilink")). Some designs are cut to hang long at the heel
and nearly cover the entire boot except for the toe. Batwings, chinks,
and shotgun chaps fit firmly but comfortably around the thigh, with
shotguns continuing to fit closely all the way down the calf, though not
so snug as to limit free knee movement. The shotgun design is a bit
flared at the ankle to allow for the rider's boot. Batwings and chinks
are not attached around the leg below the knee.

## See also

-   [Buckskins](Buckskins "wikilink")
-   [Personal protective
    equipment](Personal_protective_equipment "wikilink")

## References

## Further reading

-   "Cowboy Armor." *[Western Horseman](Western_Horseman "wikilink")*,
    July 2007, pp 145–146
-   [Etymology On
    Line](http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?search=chaps&searchmode=none)
-   Tom Lindmier and Steve Mount. *I See By Your Outfit: Historic Cowboy
    Gear of the Northern Plains*
-   Price, Steven D., ed. *The Whole Horse Catalogue.* New York: Simon
    and Schuster/Brigadore Press, 1977, p. 168
-   ["Buckaroos in Paradise -
    Glossary"](http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/ncrhtml/crgloss.html)
    *American Memory from The Library of Congress.* Web site accessed
    September 2, 2007
-   ["Cowboy Chinks and Chaps-Pronouncing chinks and
    chaps."](http://www.cowboyway.com/What/WhatAreChinks.htm) Web site
    accessed September 2, 2007
-   ["February 2007 Westerners: Wild and Wooly
    Chaps."](https://web.archive.org/web/20070930181311/http://www.historynet.com/magazines/wild_west/4851691.html)
    *The History Net.* Web site accessed September 2, 2007
-   ["Rodeo
    terminology."](https://web.archive.org/web/20070825004911/http://captioning.robson.org/reference/language/rodeo.html)
    Web site accessed September 2, 2007
-   ["A Cowboy's Personal
    Gear"](http://www.cowboyshowcase.com/glossary%20personalgear.htm),
    web site accessed September 2, 2007
-   [Roy Rogers and Dale Evans Museum and Happy Trails Theater, p.
    17](https://web.archive.org/web/20061117154808/http://www.royrogers.com/rredpacket.pdf)
-   ["Cowboy"](http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9026671/cowboy),
    *Encyclopædia Britannica Online.* Web page accessed March 27, 2008

[Category:1870s fashion](Category:1870s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Rider
apparel](Category:Rider_apparel "wikilink") [Category:Safety
clothing](Category:Safety_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Trousers and
shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink") [Category:Western
wear](Category:Western_wear "wikilink") [Category:Rodeo
clothing](Category:Rodeo_clothing "wikilink")

[1] Blevins, Win. *Dictionary of the American West.* Seattle: Sasquatch
Books, 2001 , pp.75-76
["Gifts from the Indians", *North Carolina Indians,* web page accessed
April 14,
2008](http://www.doa.state.nc.us/CIA/documents/factsheets/ncindiansfactsheet.pdf)


[2]

[3] Rickey, Don Jr. *$10 Horse, $40 Saddle: Cowboy Clothing, Arms, Tools
and Horse Gear of the 1880's.* The Old Army Press, 1976, LC no. 76-9411.
pp.46-47

[4] Cassidy, Frederic G., ed. *Dictionary of American Regional English*,
vol. I. Cambridge/London:Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1985
(vol I)

[5] Simpson, J.A., Weiner, E.S.C. (prepared by). Oxford English
Dictionary, vol. III (Chan-creeky). Oxford:Clarendon Press, Oxford
University Press, 2nd Edition, 1989, 2000 reprint, pp. 24 and 28. (Vol.
III only), (set)
[Merriam-Webster on-line
dictionary](http://mw4.m-w.com/dictionary/chaparejos) Web page accessed
April 14, 2008.
[Multiple definitions and etymologies of
*chaps*](http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/chaps) Web page accessed
March 10, 2008.

[6] [Vocabulario Vaquero p.
52-54.](https://books.google.com/books?id=MR4SY5n3_L8C&printsec=frontcover&vq=chaparro#PPA53,M1)
[Grolier's Academic American
Encyclopedia](https://books.google.com/books?id=4JkjAAAAMAAJ&q=+%22chaparro%22&pgis=1)
[New *Encyclopædia
Britannica*](https://books.google.com/books?lr=lang_en%7Clang_es&ei=_W4DSPC8Do2etAOq9Yg7&id=JsAqAAAAMAAJ&dq=chaparro&q=chaparro&pgis=1)
[Spanglish: The Making of a New American
Language](https://books.google.com/books?id=3y05OHRhL6oC&pg=PA94&dq=latino+dictionary+%22chaparro%22&lr=lang_en%7Clang_es&ei=_W4DSPC8Do2etAOq9Yg7&sig=2BsJVePbnfGHtlEP_4upb7uuhM8)
[The Barnhart Dictionary of
Etymology](https://books.google.com/books?lr=lang_en%7Clang_es&ei=224DSJWwLY78sgPB_-w7&id=mFAYAAAAIAAJ&dq=chaparro&q=chaparro&pgis=1)
[The History of
Basque](https://books.google.com/books?id=ZZo2gW3fJKgC&pg=PA417&vq=chaparro&dq=chaparro&source=gbs_search_s&sig=v-7qSGlc09kbFSma1ehxLij6T4o)
[Diccionario de la Lengua Española](DRAE "wikilink")
[1](http://buscon.rae.es/draeI/)

[7]

[8] Western Canadian Dictionary and Phrase Book: Sandilands, John.
Western Canadian Dictionary and Phrase Book:Picturesque Language of the
Cowboy and the Broncho-Buster. University of Alberta Press, 1977;
facsimile of 1913 ed.

[9]

[10]

[11] The Australian Oxford Dictionary, 2nd edition. Ed. Bruce Moore.
Oxford University Press, 2004. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford
University Press. Utah State University Libraries. 11 April 2008

[12]

[13] [Cowboyway.com](http://www.cowboyway.com/What/WhatAreChinks.htm),
explanation of chaps styles. Web page accessed March 10, 2008.

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18] [Smead, Robert Norman. "Vocabulario Vaquero/cowboy Talk: A
Dictionary Of Spanish Terms From The American
West"](https://books.google.com/books?id=MR4SY5n3_L8C&pg=PA59&lpg=PA59&dq),
p. 59. Accessed July 24, 2013.

[19] Draper, Robert. "21st -Century Cowboys: Why the Spirit Endures."
*National Geographic,* December 2007, pp. 114-135, ref p. 124

[20] "Cowboy Armor." *Western Horseman*, July 2007, pp145-146

[21] [Manufacturer
website](http://www.shootingstar.montana.com/chaps2.htm) offering
farrier chaps with optional break-away front

[22]

[23]

[24] ["Westerners: Wild and Wooly Chaps." *Wild West* Magazine, February
2007, *The History
Net.*](http://www.historynet.com/magazines/wild_west/4851691.html) Web
site accessed September 2, 2007.

[25] [Causey-Escobedo, Tina. "A View from the Saddle." *Island
Temptations,* Spring,
2005.](http://www.island-temptations.com/old/spring05/story2/) Web page
accessed April 28, 2008. (Images at end of article show riders wearing
Zamorros)

[26] [Colombian
Zamorros](http://ocalapasofino.com/tack/Colombian_tack7.htm)

[27] [Definition of Zamorros (in
Spanish)](http://www.orientevirtual.org/itin/casadelosabuelos/glosario.htm)

[28] [Roy Campbell](Roy_Campbell_(poet) "wikilink") (1957) *Portugal*,
Max Reinhardt, London, 206 pages, page 100

[29]

[30] [USEF Rules](http://www.usef.org), *see* Equitation and Western
divisions, Western Pleasure in various breed divisions

[31]

[32]

[33] ["Leather Chaps for Men and
Women"](http://www.frankyfashion.com/gdept.aspx?dept_id=07)

[34]

[35]

[36] [Driza-Bone, the original, Australian Outback Oilskin cloth, waxed
cotton, Long Duster coat - Mill Creek Trading
Company](http://www.millcreek-trading.com/drizabone/drizabone_trousers_CHAPS_new.html)

[37] [chap designs with single front lacing "for
safety."](http://www.shootingstar.montana.com/chaps2.htmHistoric)

[38]