![](Chino_pants.jpg "fig:Chino_pants.jpg") made from chino cloth,
generally referred to as chinos\]\] **Chino cloth** ( ) is a
[twill](twill "wikilink") fabric, originally made of 100%
[cotton](cotton "wikilink"). The most common items made from it,
[trousers](trousers "wikilink"), are widely called *chinos*. Today it is
also found in cotton-synthetic blends.

Developed in the mid-19th century for British and French military
uniforms, it has since migrated into civilian wear. Trousers of such a
fabric gained popularity in the U.S. when [Spanish–American
War](Spanish–American_War "wikilink") veterans returned from the
[Philippines](Philippines "wikilink") with their twill military
trousers.

## Etymology

As the cloth itself was originally made in China, the trousers were
known in Spanish as *pantalones chinos* (Chinese pants), which became
shortened to simply "chinos" in English.[1]

## History

First designed to be used in the military and then taken up by
civilians, chino fabric was originally made to be simple, durable and
comfortable for soldiers to wear; the use of natural earth-tone colors
also began the move towards
[camouflage](Military_camouflage "wikilink"), instead of the brightly
colored [tunics](tunic "wikilink") used prior. The British and then
American armies started wearing it as standard during the latter half of
the 1800s.[2]

The pure-cotton fabric is widely used for trousers, referred to as
chinos. The original [khaki](khaki "wikilink") (light brown) is the
traditional and most popular color, but chinos are made in many
shades.[3]

## References

## Further reading

-

-

-

[Category:Woven fabrics](Category:Woven_fabrics "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]