***Churidar***, or more properly ***churidar*** **pyjama** is tightly
fitting trouser worn by both men and women in the [Indian
subcontinent](Indian_subcontinent "wikilink"). *Churidar* are a variant
of the common *[shalwar](Shalwar_Qameez "wikilink")* pants. Shalwars are
cut wide at the top and narrow at the ankle. Churidars narrow more
quickly, so that contours of the leg are revealed. They are usually cut
on the [bias](Bias_(textile) "wikilink"), making them naturally
stretchy. Stretch is important when pants are closefitting. They are
also longer than the leg and sometimes finish with a tightly fitting
buttoned cuff at the ankle. The excess length falls into folds and
appears like a set of bangles resting on the ankle (hence 'churidar';
'churi': bangle, 'dar': like). When the wearer is sitting, the extra
material is the "ease" that makes it possible to bend the legs and sit
comfortably. The word *churidar* is from Urdu and made its way into
English only in the 20th century.[1] Earlier, tight fitting
churidar-like pants worn in India were referred to by the British as
*Moghul breeches*, *long-drawers*, or *mosquito drawers.*[2]

The churidar is usually worn with a *[qameez](qameez "wikilink")*
(tunic) by women or a *[kurta](kurta "wikilink")* (a loose overshirt) by
men, or they can form part of a bodice and skirt ensemble.

## Gallery

<center>

Image:Kashmiri children in churidar 1890.jpg\|Portrait of Kashmiri
children wearing churidar pyjamas circa 1890 Image:churidar.jpg\|19th
century painting of Indian women wearing transparent skirts over
churidar pants Image:Silk kurta churidar mojari2.jpg\|Cotton churidar
worn with silk side-opening kurta and *mojari* shoes Image:Vita in
Bangladesh.jpg\|A woman visiting Bangladesh wearing a churidar

<File:Photograph> of President Truman shaking hands with Prime Minister
Jawaharlal Nehru of India upon Nehru's arrival at... - NARA -
200152.jpg\|[Jawaharlal Nehru](Jawaharlal_Nehru "wikilink"), prime
minister of India, dressed in churidar being received by American
president [Harry S. Truman](Harry_S._Truman "wikilink") upon arrival at
the National Airport, Washington DC, October 1949 <File:Working>
Committee.jpg\|[Muhammad Ali Jinnah](Muhammad_Ali_Jinnah "wikilink"),
the founder of [Pakistan](Pakistan "wikilink"), center, and [Liaquat Ali
Khan](Liaquat_Ali_Khan "wikilink"), its first prime minister, extreme
left, both in churidars, at the [All-India Muslim
League](All-India_Muslim_League "wikilink") Working Committee meeting in
[Lahore](Lahore "wikilink"), March 1940 Image:Choonasee pant
churidar.jpg\|Portrait of the son of H.H. Chunnasee Rajoonath Pant
(wearing churidars). 1860. Oriental and India Office Collection, British
Library. Image:Maharaja nabha churidar.jpg\|Portrait of Sir Hira Singh,
Raja of [Nabha](Nabha "wikilink"), [Punjab](Punjab_region "wikilink"),
in churidars. c. 1890. Oriental and India Office Collection, British
Library.

</center>

## See also

-   [Salwar kameez](Salwar_kameez "wikilink")
-   [Jammu dress](Jammu_dress "wikilink")
-   [Kandura](Kandura "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Indian clothing](Category:Indian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Bangladeshi
clothing](Category:Bangladeshi_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Pakistani
clothing](Category:Pakistani_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Hosiery](Category:Hosiery "wikilink") [Category:Trousers and
shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1] Hawkins, R. E. 1984. *Common Indian words in English*. Oxford
University Press, New Delhi.

[2] Yule, Henry and A. C. Burnell. 1903. ''Hobson-Jobson: A Glossary of
Colloquial Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases, and of Kindred Terms,
Etymological, Historical, Geographical and Discursive. London: John
Murray. 1021 pages.