![](Louis_le_dernier3_crop.jpg "fig:Louis_le_dernier3_crop.jpg"),
dressed in culottes\]\]
![](James_Monroe_Cabinet.jpg "fig:James_Monroe_Cabinet.jpg"), the last
U.S. President who dressed according to the [style of the late 18th
century](1775–1795_in_fashion#Men's_fashion "wikilink"), with his
Cabinet in 1823. The president wears knee breeches, while his
secretaries wear long [trousers](trousers "wikilink").\]\]

**Culottes** are an item of clothing worn on the lower half of the body.
The term can refer to split skirts, historical men's breeches, or
women's under-pants; this is an example of fashion-industry words taken
from designs across history, languages and cultures, then being used to
describe different garments, often creating confusion among historians
and readers. The French word [*culotte*](wikt:culotte#French "wikilink")
is (a pair of) panties, pants, knickers, trousers, shorts, or
(historically) [breeches](breeches "wikilink"); derived from the French
word [*culot*](culot#French "wikilink"), meaning the lower half of a
thing, the lower garment in this case.

In English-speaking history culottes were originally the knee-breeches
commonly worn by gentlemen of the European upper-classes from the [late
Middle Ages or Renaissance](1400–1500_in_fashion "wikilink") through the
[early nineteenth century](1795–1820_in_fashion "wikilink"). The style
of tight trousers ending just below the knee was popularized in
[France](France "wikilink") during the reign of [Henry
III](Henry_III_of_France "wikilink") (1574–1589).[1] Culottes were
normally closed and fastened about the leg, to the knee, by buttons, a
strap and buckle, or a [draw-string](draw-string "wikilink"). During the
[French Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink") of 1789–1799,
working-class revolutionaries were known as the
"*[sans-culottes](sans-culottes "wikilink")*" – literally, "without
culottes" – a name derived from their rejection of
[aristocratic](Aristocracy_(class) "wikilink") apparel.[2] In the United
States, only the [first five
Presidents](List_of_Presidents_of_the_United_States#List_of_presidents "wikilink"),
from [George Washington](George_Washington "wikilink") through [James
Monroe](James_Monroe "wikilink"), wore culottes according to the [style
of the late 18th
century](1775–95_in_Western_fashion#Men's_fashion "wikilink").[3][4]

## In military uniforms

European [Military uniforms](Military_uniforms "wikilink") incorporated
culottes as a standard uniform article, the lower leg being covered by
either stockings, leggings, or knee-high boots. Culottes were a common
part of military uniforms during the European wars of the
eighteenth-century (the [Great Northern
War](Great_Northern_War "wikilink"), the [War of the Spanish
Succession](War_of_the_Spanish_Succession "wikilink"), the [War of the
Austrian Succession](War_of_the_Austrian_Succession "wikilink"), the
[Seven Years' War](Seven_Years'_War "wikilink"), the [Franco-British
Colonial Wars](French_and_Indian_Wars "wikilink"), and the [American
Revolution](American_Revolution "wikilink")).

Historical Japanese field workers and military
[Samurai](Samurai "wikilink") wore [hakama](hakama "wikilink") that were
sometimes tight at the bottom as French military culottes. Wider
bifurcated wrap-skirt hakama were for horse-back riding. Eighteenth and
nineteenth-century European women introduced culottes cut with a pattern
looking like long hakama, hiding their legs while riding horses. Today
[Aikido](Aikido "wikilink") and [Kendo](Kendo "wikilink") masters wear
long hakama, to hide their feet from opponents.

## Culottes for women

In modern English, the use of the word culottes can mean a close fitting
pair of pants ending at the knees[5], such as [Lady Diana
Spencer](Diana,_Princess_of_Wales "wikilink") popularised, in the early
1980s. The term is used as such in the United Kingdom and Canada. In
this sense, culottes are similar to the American knickerbockers (
knickers), except whereas the latter are loose in fit. Culottes can,
also, in some cases, describe a split or
[bifurcated](wikt:bifurcation "wikilink") [skirt](skirt "wikilink")[6]
or any garment which "hangs like a skirt, but is actually pants."[7]
During the [Victorian Era](Victorian_Era "wikilink") (mid- to
late-nineteenth century European culture) long split skirts were
developed for [horseback riding](horseback_riding "wikilink") so that
women could sit astride a horse with a man's [saddle](saddle "wikilink")
rather than riding [side-saddle](side-saddle "wikilink"). Horse-riding
culottes for women were controversial because they were used to break a
sexual taboo against women riding horses when they were expected to hide
their lower limbs at all times. Later, split skirts were developed to
provide women more freedom to do other activities as well, such as
[gardening](gardening "wikilink"), cleaning, [bike](bicycle "wikilink")
riding, etc. and still look like one is wearing a skirt.[8]

### School uniforms

Culottes are used in [school uniforms](school_uniforms "wikilink") for
girls. They can be used along with skirts, or they may be used as a
replacement for skirts. Culottes are worn as part of a uniform mainly to
primary and middle schools. Culottes were also part of the uniform of UK
[Brownie Guides](Girl_Guides "wikilink")[9] up until recently, when the
uniform was modernised and the traditional brown culottes (and the navy
blue culottes worn by the Girl Guides) were replaced.

### Skorts

![](Culotte_skirt_and_interior_view.jpg "fig:Culotte_skirt_and_interior_view.jpg")
In place of the term culotte, the term [skort](skort "wikilink") (a
[portmanteau](portmanteau "wikilink") for skirt and shorts) is more
widely used in some areas. While some garments sold as culottes resemble
short [trousers](trousers "wikilink"), to truly be a skort it needs to
look like a skirt. Thus, they differ from trousers or
[shorts](shorts "wikilink") by being much fuller at the bottom
([hem](hem "wikilink")) than at the [waist](waist "wikilink"). A skort
is shorts that have a front covering to resemble a skirt[10] or short
pant legs with a same length or longer skirt sewn over the top.[11]

Some culottes have a part sewn over only the front, while some are
shorts with a skirt sewn over them. While these may not be completely
the same as skorts, they are often called by either name, so either term
can apply.

### [Demi-denims](Demi-denims "wikilink")

![](Demi-denims_FW18.jpg "fig:Demi-denims_FW18.jpg") A cut which became
popular in 21 century - a combined silhouette of pants which appear to
be made out of two separate garments. They look like slim fit jeans from
behind, like a skirt or culottes worn on top of slim fit jeans - from
the
front.[1](https://www.harpersbazaar.com/uk/fashion/shows-trends/news/a40214/demi-denim-demi-jeans-ksenia-schnaider/)

### Contemporary French under-pants

The term "culottes" in [French](French_language "wikilink") is now used
to describe women's [panties](panties "wikilink"), an article of
clothing that has little or no relation to the historic men's culotte
breeches, except that in French, calling something "culottes" is like
calling them "bottoms". The historical French term
*"[sans-culottes](sans-culottes "wikilink")"* which was once the
rejection of aristrocrats' breeches, is now used colloquially to mean
the same as an English colloquialism *"[going
commando](going_commando "wikilink")"* or not wearing under-pants.[12]

## References

[Category:1960s fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1990s fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink") [Category:Trousers and
shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5] Calasibetta, Charlotte Mankey; Tortora, Phyllis (2010)The Fairchild
Dictionary of Fashion. New York: Fairchild Books: .

[6] [WordNet Search -
3.0](http://wordnet.princeton.edu/perl/webwn?s=culotte)

[7]

[8] [Culottes Skirt is a
Skort](http://www.apparelsearch.com/Definitions/Clothing/culottes.htm)

[9] [Bedfordshire Guiding - History of Brownie
Uniforms](http://www.bedsguiding.org.uk/uniforhistory.htm)

[10] [Fashion Design Schools - Glossary of
Terms](http://www.fashion-design-school-guys.com/glossary.php)

[11] [glossary](http://www.olsensmilldirect.com/custservice/glossary.html)

[12]