**Hammer pants** (frequently and mistakenly referred to as "[parachute
pants](parachute_pants "wikilink")") are customized/modified [baggy
pants](Wide-leg_jeans#In_modern_fashion "wikilink") tapered at the ankle
with a [sagging](Sagging_(fashion)#Origin "wikilink") rise made suitable
for [hip-hop dancing](Hip-hop_dance "wikilink").[1] They were
[popularized in the 1980s and
1990s](Hip_hop_fashion#Late_1980s_to_early_1990s_fashion "wikilink") by
rapper [MC Hammer](MC_Hammer "wikilink").[2] They were inspired by
[harem pants](Harem_pants#Late_20th_century "wikilink") which originated
in the [Arabian Peninsula](Arabian_Peninsula "wikilink") and introduced
to Western fashion by [Paul Poiret](Paul_Poiret "wikilink") around 1910.

MC Hammer often wore them during live concerts and music videos.

[Hammer's specialized clothing
line](MC_Hammer#Legacy_and_pop_culture_fame "wikilink") would come in a
variety of colors and were usually [shiny and
flashy](1990s_in_fashion#Hip-hop_2 "wikilink")-styled, as seen
throughout his hip-hop career during talk show appearances, concerts,
music videos and again on his own [TV reality
show](Reality_television#Documentary-style "wikilink") in 2009 called
*[Hammertime](Hammertime "wikilink")*.[3][4]

## References

[Pants](Category:MC_Hammer "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Trousers and
shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink") [Category:Hip hop
fashion](Category:Hip_hop_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]