![](The_Harem_Girl_-_Bert_Green_for_Puck_magazine,_29_March_1911.jpg "fig:The_Harem_Girl_-_Bert_Green_for_Puck_magazine,_29_March_1911.jpg")'',
March 1911. A Western woman wearing the then newly fashionable 'harem'
look.\]\] **Harem pants** or **harem trousers** are baggy, long
[pants](trousers "wikilink") caught in at the [ankle](ankle "wikilink").
Early on, the style was also called a **harem skirt**.[1] The original
so-called 'harem pants/skirts' were introduced to Western fashion by
designers such as [Paul Poiret](Paul_Poiret "wikilink") around 1910,
although they themselves were inspired by [Middle
East](Middle_East "wikilink") styles, and by şalvar ([Turkish
trousers](Turkish_trousers "wikilink")).[2][3] The term 'harem pants'
subsequently became popular in the West as a generic term for baggy
trousers caught in at the ankle that suggest the Turkish style, or
similar styles such as [bloomers](Bloomers_(clothing) "wikilink"), the
South Asian [shalwar](shalwar_kameez "wikilink") and [patiala
salwar](patiala_salwar "wikilink"); the Bosnian dimije;
[sirwal](sirwal "wikilink") (as worn by [Zouaves](Zouave "wikilink"));
and the Ukrainian [sharovary](sharovary "wikilink").

## Early 20th century

In 1911 the Paris couturier [Paul Poiret](Paul_Poiret "wikilink")
introduced harem pants as part of his efforts to reinvent and 'liberate'
Western female fashion.[4][5] His "Style Sultane" included the
*jupe-culotte* or harem pant, made with full legs tied in at the
ankle.[6] Alternative names for the harem skirt/pants included
*jupe-sultane* (sultan skirt), and *jupe-pantalon* (trouser-skirt).[7]
These designs were seen as controversial as Western women typically did
not wear trousers.[8][9] Poiret's explicit exoticism and references to
Middle Eastern styles, using the imagery of [harems](harem "wikilink")
and [sultans](sultan "wikilink") to establish his
[Orientalist](Orientalism "wikilink") style, was widely regarded as
immoral and inappropriately sexualised.[10][11] Poiret himself insisted
that he designed harem pants for the chic woman to show off "the harmony
of her form and all the freedom of her native suppleness."[12] Adam
Geczy suggests that harem pants, as a direct [cultural
appropriation](cultural_appropriation "wikilink"), represent the point
at which Western fashion began seriously challenging traditional
cultural claims to their own styles.[13] Despite the fierce criticism
from other designers such as [Jeanne Paquin](Jeanne_Paquin "wikilink")
who specifically criticised how harem pants slumped rather than tapered
at the ankle (unlike the [hobble skirt](hobble_skirt "wikilink")), it
was noted that Paquin's own collections showed signs of having been
influenced by the new styles.[14] Although Poiret is often credited with
single-handedly inventing trousers for Western women, the couturier
[Jeanne Margaine-Lacroix](Jeanne_Margaine-Lacroix "wikilink") presented
wide-legged trousers in 1910,[15] and a fellow couturier, Bourniche, is
also credited with designing such styles at the time.[16][17]

## Late 20th century

Harem pants came back into fashion in the 1980s, when they were
remembered for being 'costumey.'[18] A version of harem pants
popularized in the late 1980s by [M. C.
Hammer](MC_Hammer "wikilink")[19] became known as [Hammer
pants](Hammer_pants "wikilink").

## Contemporary harem pants

Harem pants are commonly worn with a [pleated
skirt](pleated_skirt "wikilink")—a short skirt that covers the top
portion of the harem pants. Both harem pants and pleated skirts are
commonly used in [belly dancing](Belly_dance "wikilink").[20]

## See also

-   [Parachute pants](Parachute_pants "wikilink")

## References

## External links

1.  <http://sewguide.com/harem-pants-diy-pattern/>

[de:Haremshose](de:Haremshose "wikilink")
[ru:Шаровары](ru:Шаровары "wikilink")

[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:1910s fashion](Category:1910s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1980s fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2010s fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19] [In The 80s — Clothes of the Eighties, Harem
Pants](http://www.inthe80s.com/clothes/harempants0.shtml)

[20]