![](Joykeep_3.JPG "fig:Joykeep_3.JPG") **Hip-huggers** are
[pants](trousers "wikilink") worn by both men and women, generally made
of [denim](denim "wikilink") and fitted tightly around the
[hips](hip "wikilink") and [thighs](thigh "wikilink"), while usually
having flared or [bell-bottom](bell-bottoms "wikilink") lower legs.
Hip-huggers were first designed by [Irene
Kasmer](Irene_Kasmer "wikilink") in 1957 in Los Angeles, California.
They were worn by the [mods](Mod_(subculture) "wikilink") in the mid
1960s and into the early 1970s. The late 1970s saw the return of
hip-huggers in the disco scene. They were also worn, but to a lesser
extent, in the early 1980s, but made a reappearance in the 2000s.[1] The
hip-huggers of the 2000s were distinguished by the tightness of the
knee, as well as the lower rise of the jeans, typically well below the
belly button. This is the product of the [boot cut](boot_cut "wikilink")
style.[2]

The 2000 styles saw pants that were not as low as the ones introduced in
2001, with a kind of "false" hip hugger introduced. The waist was
somewhat high with the belt-loops being wide, giving off the illusion of
low-cut pants while covering more of the body.[3]

Hip-huggers can be worn in a variety of different styles, sometimes
"riding" low to expose the [buttocks](buttocks "wikilink") to varying
degrees. There are also variations of hip-huggers created with a
material designed to stretch and tighter fitting stretch materials that
vary in color.

## References

[Category:Jeans by type](Category:Jeans_by_type "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:1950s fashion](Category:1950s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1960s fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1970s fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2000s fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]