![](jeans.jpg "fig:jeans.jpg")
![](Blue_jeans_fading.png "fig:Blue_jeans_fading.png")

**Jeans** are a type of [pants](pants "wikilink") or trousers, typically
made from [denim](denim "wikilink") or
[dungaree](Dungaree_(fabric) "wikilink") cloth. Often the term "jeans"
refers to a particular style of trousers, called "blue jeans", which
were invented by [Jacob W. Davis](Jacob_W._Davis "wikilink") in
partnership with [Levi Strauss & Co.](Levi_Strauss_&_Co. "wikilink") in
1871[1] and patented by [Jacob W. Davis](Jacob_W._Davis "wikilink") and
[Levi Strauss](Levi_Strauss "wikilink") on May 20, 1873. Prior to the
Levi Strauss patented trousers, the term "blue jeans" had been long in
use for various garments (including trousers, overalls, and coats),
constructed from blue-colored denim.[2]

"Jean" also references a (historic) type of sturdy cloth commonly made
with a cotton warp and wool weft (also known as "Virginia cloth"). Jean
cloth can be entirely cotton as well, similar to denim. Originally
designed for [miners](miner "wikilink"), modern jeans was popularized as
casual wear by [Marlon Brando](Marlon_Brando "wikilink") and [James
Dean](James_Dean "wikilink") in their 1950s films, particularly *[The
Wild One](The_Wild_One "wikilink")* and *[Rebel Without a
Cause](Rebel_Without_a_Cause "wikilink")*,[3] leading to the fabric
becoming a symbol of rebellion among [teenagers](teenager "wikilink"),
especially members of the [greaser](Greaser_(subculture) "wikilink")
subculture. From the 1960s onwards, jeans became common among various
youth subcultures and subsequently young members of the general
population. Nowadays, they are one of the most popular types of
specialty trousers in [Western culture](Western_culture "wikilink").
Historic brands include [Levi's](Levi_Strauss_&_Co. "wikilink"),
[Lee](Lee_(jeans) "wikilink"), and
[Wrangler](Wrangler_(jeans) "wikilink").

## History

### Fabric

![](Manifattura_genovese,_abito_da_festa_in_tela_di_genova_(jeans),_1850-1900_ca..JPG "fig:Manifattura_genovese,_abito_da_festa_in_tela_di_genova_(jeans),_1850-1900_ca..JPG"),
[Genoa](Genoa "wikilink"), [Italy](Italy "wikilink").\]\]

Research on the trade of jean fabric shows that it emerged in the cities
of [Genoa](Genoa "wikilink"), [Italy](Italy "wikilink"), and
[Nîmes](Nîmes "wikilink"), [France](France "wikilink"). Gênes, the
French word for [Genoa](Genoa "wikilink"), may be the origin of the word
"[jeans](Wikt:jeans "wikilink")". In Nîmes, weavers tried to reproduce
jean fabric but instead developed a similar [twill](twill "wikilink")
fabric that became known as denim, from *de [Nîmes](Nîmes "wikilink")*,
meaning "from Nîmes". Genoa's jean fabric was a
[fustian](fustian "wikilink") textile of "medium quality and of
reasonable cost", very similar to [cotton](cotton "wikilink")
[corduroy](corduroy "wikilink") for which Genoa was famous, and was
"used for work clothes in general". The [Genoese
navy](Genoese_navy "wikilink") equipped its sailors with jeans, as they
needed a fabric which could be worn wet or dry.[4][5] Nîmes's "denim"
was coarser, considered higher quality, and was used "for over garments
such as smocks or overalls".[6] Nearly all [indigo](indigo "wikilink"),
needed for dyeing, came from indigo bush plantations in
[India](India "wikilink") until the late 19th century. It was replaced
by indigo synthesis methods developed in
[Germany](Germany "wikilink").[7]

![](Closeup_of_copper_rivet_on_jeans.jpg "fig:Closeup_of_copper_rivet_on_jeans.jpg")s
for reinforcing pockets are a characteristic feature of blue jeans.\]\]
By the 17th century, jean was a crucial textile for working-class people
in Northern Italy. This is seen in a series of genre paintings from
around the 17th century attributed to an artist now nicknamed The Master
of the Blue Jeans.[8] The ten paintings depict impoverished scenes with
lower-class figures wearing a fabric that looks like denim. The fabric
would have been Genoese jean, which was cheaper. Genre painting came to
prominence in late 16th century, and the non-nobility subject matter in
all ten paintings places them among others that portray similar
scenes.[9]

Dungaree was mentioned for the first time in the 17th century, when it
was referred to as cheap, coarse thick cotton cloth, often colored blue
but sometimes white, worn by impoverished people in what was then a
region of [Bombay](Bombay "wikilink"), [India](India "wikilink") a
dockside village called Dongri. This cloth was "dungri" in
[Hindi](Hindi "wikilink"). Dungri was exported to
[England](England "wikilink") and used for manufacturing of cheap,
robust working clothes. In English, the word "dungri" became pronounced
as "dungaree".[10]

### Rivets

The term jeans appears first in 1795, when a Swiss banker by the name
[Jean-Gabriel Eynard](Jean-Gabriel_Eynard "wikilink") and his brother
Jacques went to Genoa and both were soon heading a flourishing
commercial concern. In 1800 [Massena](Massena "wikilink")'s troops
entered the town and Jean-Gabriel was entrusted with their supply. In
particular he furnished them with uniforms cut from blue cloth called
"bleu de Genes" whence later derives the famous garment known worldwide
as "blue jeans".[11]

[Levi Strauss](Levi_Strauss "wikilink"), as a young man in 1851, went
from Germany to New York to join his older brothers who ran a goods
store. In 1853, he moved to [San Francisco](San_Francisco "wikilink") to
open his own dry goods business. [Jacob
Davis](Jacob_Davis_(inventor) "wikilink") was a tailor who often bought
bolts of cloth from the [Levi Strauss &
Co](Levi_Strauss_&_Co "wikilink"). [wholesale](wholesale "wikilink")
house. In 1872, Davis wrote to Strauss asking to partner with him to
patent and sell clothing reinforced with [rivets](rivet "wikilink").[12]
The [copper](copper "wikilink") rivets were to reinforce the points of
stress, such as pocket corners and at the bottom of the button fly. Levi
accepted Davis's offer,[13] and the two men received US patent No.
139,121 for an "Improvement in Fastening Pocket-Openings" on May 20,
1873.[14]
![](Photo_étiquette_Levi's_501.jpg "fig:Photo_étiquette_Levi's_501.jpg")

Davis and Strauss experimented with different fabrics. An early attempt
was brown [cotton duck](cotton_duck "wikilink"), a bottom-weight fabric.
Finding denim a more suitable material for work-pants, they began using
it to manufacture their riveted pants. The denim used was produced by an
American manufacturer. Popular legend incorrectly states that it was
imported from [Nimes, France](Nimes,_France "wikilink"). A popular myth
is that Strauss initially sold brown canvas pants to miners, later dyed
them blue, turned to using denim, and only after Davis wrote to him,
added rivets.[15]

Initially, Strauss' jeans were simply sturdy trousers worn by [factory
workers](working_class "wikilink"), miners, farmers, and cattlemen
throughout the North American West.[16][17] During this period, men's
jeans had the [fly](Fly_(clothing) "wikilink") down the front, whereas
women's jeans had the fly down the left side.[18] When [Levi Strauss &
Co.](Levi_Strauss_&_Co. "wikilink") patented the modern, mass-produced
prototype in the year 1873, there were two pockets in the front and one
on the back with copper rivets. Later, the jeans were redesigned to
today's industry standard of five pockets including a little watch
pocket and copper rivets.[19]

### 20th century evolution

Fewer jeans were made during [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"),
but 'waist overalls' were introduced to the world by US soldiers, who
sometimes wore them off duty.[20] [21] By the 1960s, both men's and
women's jeans had the [zipper](zipper "wikilink") down the front.
Historic photographs indicate that in the decades before they became a
staple of fashion, jeans generally fit quite loosely, much like a pair
of [bib overalls](overall "wikilink") without the bib. Indeed, until
1960, Levi Strauss called its flagship product "waist overalls" rather
than "jeans".

After [James Dean](James_Dean "wikilink") popularized them in the movie
*[Rebel Without a Cause](Rebel_Without_a_Cause "wikilink")*, wearing
jeans became a symbol of youth rebellion during the 1950s.[22][23]
During the 1960s the wearing of jeans became more acceptable, and by the
1970s it had become general fashion in the United States for casual
wear.[24] However, the acceptance of jean to becoming casual wear is
still relatively low in Japan.[25]

Examples of intentional denim distressing strictly to make them more
fashionable can be seen as early as 1935 in Vogue's June issue.[26]
Michael Belluomo, editor of *Sportswear International Magazine*, Oct/Nov
1987, P. 45, wrote that in 1965, Limbo, a boutique in the New York East
Village, was "the first retailer to wash a new pair of jeans to get a
used, worn effect, and the idea became a hit." He continued, "\[Limbo\]
hired East Village artists to embellish the jeans with patches, decals,
and other touches, and sold them for $200." In the early 1980s the denim
industry introduced the [stone-washing](Stonewashed_jeans "wikilink")
technique developed by GWG also known as "Great Western Garment Co."
Donald Freeland of [Edmonton, Alberta](Edmonton,_Alberta "wikilink")
pioneered the method,[27] which helped to bring denim to a larger and
more versatile market. Acceptance of jeans continued through the 1980s
and 1990s. Originally an esoteric fashion choice, in the 2010s jeans may
be seen being worn by men and women of all ages.[28]

## Manufacturing processes

### Dyeing

![](Indigo_skeletal.svg "fig:Indigo_skeletal.svg"), the blue of blue
jeans.\]\]

Traditionally, jeans were [dyed](dye "wikilink") to a
[blue](blue "wikilink") color using natural [indigo
dye](indigo_dye "wikilink"). Most denim is now dyed using synthetic
indigo. Approximately 20 thousand tons of indigo are produced annually
for this purpose, though only a few grams of the dye are required for
each pair.[29] For other colors of denim other dyes must be used.
Currently, jeans are produced in any color that can be achieved with
cotton.

For more information on dyeing, refer to [denim](denim "wikilink") and
the discussion there of using pigment dyes.

### Pre-shrinking

![](Group_at_Piazza_del_Popolo,_Rome.jpg "fig:Group_at_Piazza_del_Popolo,_Rome.jpg"),
[bootcut jeans](bootcut_jeans "wikilink"), [drainpipe
jeans](drainpipe_jeans "wikilink") and [lowrise
jeans](Low-rise_jeans "wikilink"). (Rome, 2008)\]\]

In 1962 Levi Strauss introduced their own pre-shrunk jeans (Lee and
Wrangler jeans had already long been pre-shrunk); these did not shrink
further after purchase, allowing the consumer to purchase a correctly
fitting size. Pre shrink is most common in jeans nowadays[30] These
jeans were known as the 505 regular fit jeans. The 505 are almost
identical to the 501s with the exception of the button-fly. The Levi's
Corporation also introduced a slim boot-cut fit known as 517 and 527.
The difference between the two is the 517s sit at the waist line and the
527s sit below the waist line. Later, Levi's would develop other styles
and fits such as the loose, slim, comfort, relaxed, skinny, and a
regular fit with a tapered leg.

### Used and distressed looks

![](Reagan_with_horse.jpg "fig:Reagan_with_horse.jpg") wearing stonewash
denim associated with [Western clothing](Western_clothing "wikilink"),
1970s\]\] The used or "[acid wash](Stone_washing "wikilink")" look is
created by means of abrading the jeans and/or treating them with
chemicals, such as acryl resin, phenol, a hypochlorite, potassium
permanganate, caustic soda, acids etc.[31]

Ripping or [distressing](distressing "wikilink") of jeans, though also
arising naturally as a result of wear and tear, is sometimes
deliberately performed by suppliers - with distressed clothing sometimes
selling for more than a nondistressed pair. For example,
[Pucci](Emilio_Pucci "wikilink") sold "embellished mid-rise boyfriend
jeans" for £600 (US$860).[32]

### Sandblasting or abrading with sandpaper

Consumers wanting jeans that appear worn can buy jeans that have been
specially treated. To give the fabrics the worn look, [sandblasting done
with chemicals or by adding pumice stone to the washing
process](abrasive_blasting "wikilink") or abrading with sandpaper is
often done.

### Environmental and humanitarian impact

A typical pair of blue jeans uses 919 gallons (3479 liters) of water
during its life cycle. This includes the water to irrigate the cotton
crop, manufacture the jeans, and the numerous washes by the
consumer.[33]

The production of jeans with a "used look" can be more environmentally
damaging than regular jeans,[34] depending on how the waste compounds
are processed. Sandblasting and treating with sandpaper has the risk of
causing [silicosis](silicosis "wikilink") to the workers, and in
[Turkey](Turkey "wikilink"), more than 5,000 textile workers have been
stricken with this disease, and 46 people are known to have died. Some
companies have announced they are banning the use of sandblasting.[35]

## Care and wear

Despite most jeans being "pre-shrunk", they are still sensitive to
slight further shrinkage and loss of color from being washed. The Levi
Strauss company recommends avoiding washing jeans as much as possible.
Carl Chiara, Levi Strauss director of brand and special projects, has a
credo: The less you wash your jeans, the better your jeans become.[36]
These and other suggestions to avoid washing jeans where possible have
encountered criticism. Cory Warren, editor of *LS&Co. Unzipped*,
clarifies in a response to such a criticism:

For those who prefer to refrain from washing their jeans there have been
suggestions to freeze them in order to kill the germs that cause odor.
However, this advice has been disputed as ineffective and replaced with
the suggestion of baking them for ten minutes at 250 degrees
Fahrenheit.[37] (120 °C).

## Legal cases

### Italian rape trial

In [Rome](Rome "wikilink"), [Italy](Italy "wikilink"), in 1992, a
45-year-old driving instructor was accused of rape. When he picked up an
18-year-old girl for her first driving lesson, he allegedly raped her
for an hour, then told her that if she was to tell anyone he would kill
her. Later that night she told her parents and her parents agreed to
help her press charges. While the alleged rapist was convicted and
sentenced, the [Italian Supreme
Court](Court_of_Cassation_(Italy) "wikilink") overturned the conviction
in 1998 because the victim wore tight jeans. It was argued that she must
have necessarily had to help her attacker remove her jeans, thus making
the act [consensual](consensual "wikilink") ("because the victim wore
very, very tight jeans, she had to help him remove them ... and by
removing the jeans ... it was no longer rape but consensual sex"). The
Italian Supreme Court stated in its decision "it is a fact of common
experience that it is nearly impossible to slip off tight jeans even
partly without the active collaboration of the person who is wearing
them."[38]

The ruling sparked widespread feminist protest. The day after the
decision, women in the [Italian
Parliament](Italian_Parliament "wikilink") protested by wearing jeans
and holding placards that read "Jeans: An Alibi for Rape". As a sign of
support, the California Senate and Assembly followed suit. Soon Patricia
Giggans, Executive Director of the Los Angeles Commission on Assaults
Against Women, (now Peace Over Violence) made [Denim
Day](Denim_Day "wikilink") an annual event. at least 20 U.S. states
officially recognize Denim Day in April. Wearing jeans on this day has
become an international symbol of protest against such attitudes about
sexual assault. As of 2008 the [Italian Supreme
Court](Court_of_Cassation_(Italy) "wikilink") has overturned their
findings, and there is no longer a "denim" defense to the charge of
rape.

### Indian divorce case

In 2014, an [Indian](India "wikilink") family court in
[Mumbai](Mumbai "wikilink") ruled that a husband objecting to his wife
wearing a [kurta](kurta "wikilink") and jeans and forcing her to wear a
[sari](sari "wikilink") amounts to cruelty inflicted by the husband and
can be a ground to seek [divorce](marriage_in_India "wikilink").[39] The
wife was thus granted a divorce on the ground of cruelty as defined
under section 27(1)(d) of Special Marriage Act, 1954.[40]

## Trends

### Worldwide market for jeans

North America accounts for 39% of global purchases for jeans, followed
by [Western Europe](Western_Europe "wikilink") at 20%, Japan and Korea
at 10% and the rest of the world at 31%.[41]

United States consumers spent more than US$14 billion on jeans in 2004
and US$15 billion in 2005.[42] US consumers bought US$13.8 billion of
men's and women's jeans in the year that ended April 30, 2011, according
to market-research firm NPD Group.[43]

### Jeans in the USSR

In the [Soviet Union](Soviet_Union "wikilink"), jeans were the symbol of
the [Western](Western_world "wikilink") way of life. The "jeans fever"
in the USSR started in 1957 during the [World Festival of Youth and
Students](World_Festival_of_Youth_and_Students "wikilink").[44]
According to a 1961 Russian textile dictionary, jeans were initially
referred to as a "worker's uniform" (рабочий костюм, *rabochii
kostyum*).[45]

The jeans brand Rokotov and Fainberg is named after the defendants in
the [Rokotov–Faibishenko case](Rokotov–Faibishenko_case "wikilink"), who
were executed for, among other things, trafficking in jeans.[46]

Although not outright banned, jeans were hard to come by in USSR. It was
seen as a symbol of rebellion by the Soviet youth who wanted to emulate
the style of film and rock stars of the West. The [Soviet
government](Soviet_government "wikilink") resisted supplying the market
with jeans as that would mean responding to the
[market](Market_(economics) "wikilink"), a
[capitalist](capitalist "wikilink") principle.[47] People went to great
lengths, sometimes resorting to violence and other illegal activities to
obtain real Western made jeans. This led to the creation of [black
markets](black_market "wikilink") and
[bootlegging](Counterfeit_consumer_goods "wikilink") of jeans, which
since has become an important cultural element in the [history of the
Soviet Union](history_of_the_Soviet_Union "wikilink").[48]

### Market-share shift to activewear

In 2014, teens were buying more [fashion](fashion "wikilink") and
[athleisure](athleisure "wikilink") clothing from brands such as
[Nike](Nike,_Inc. "wikilink") and [Lululemon](Lululemon "wikilink") over
denim classics from brands like [Abercrombie &
Fitch](Abercrombie_&_Fitch "wikilink").[49]
[Activewear](Activewear "wikilink") in 2014 comprised 28% of teens'
apparel purchases, up from 6% in 2008. In 2014, Nike, Lululemon, [Under
Armour](Under_Armour "wikilink"), and [Adidas](Adidas "wikilink") were
the most popular brands for athletic apparel among teen consumers.
Fashion retailers have begun to adjust their offerings accordingly.
Bloomberg reports that Levi's stuck to its core product (denim) instead
of adapting to consumer trends. As a result, Levi's sales decreased from
over USD 7 billion to USD 4.8 billion in 2015.[50]

### Distressed jeans

![](Recording_artist_Leigh_Jones_entertained_troops_at_Fort_Belvoir_090501_(4920457551).jpg "fig:Recording_artist_Leigh_Jones_entertained_troops_at_Fort_Belvoir_090501_(4920457551).jpg")
Distressed denim emerged from the cultural
[punk](Punk_subculture "wikilink") movement in the 1970s. Early punks
tore apart consumer goods as an expression of their anger towards
society.[51] Johnny Rotten of the [Sex Pistols](Sex_Pistols "wikilink")
manifested the British punk ideology, which was fighting against the
status quo. Denim became a key target of this politically fueled
deconstruction, with both men and women donning torn pants and jackets,
accessorized with safety pins and slogans. The trend became popular
again in the 1990s with the emergence of [grunge](grunge "wikilink")
fashion. If punk was "anti-fashion", grunge was "non-fashion". The
grunge youth wore loose-fitting ripped jeans, flannel shirts or woolen
[Pendletons](Pendleton_Woolen_Mills "wikilink") layered over T-shirts.
Their anti-conformist approach to fashion led to the popularization of
the casual chic look, a trend which continued into the 2000s.

### Low-rise jeans

Media reported in 2017 that the trend of [low-rise
jeans](low-rise_pants "wikilink"), famous in 1990s and 2000s as
[sagging](Sagging_(fashion) "wikilink"), was coming back in fashion due
to celebrities like [Justin Bieber](Justin_Bieber "wikilink") endorsing
it.[52] Low-rise jeans are usually worn 2-3 inches or more below the
navel.[53]

## Industrial production

<File:Denim> Fabric Storing.JPG\|How denim fabric is stored in the
factory. <File:Denim> fabric Cutting Machine.jpg\|Automated cutting
machines are used in RMG factory to cut the pieces. <File:PP>
Spray.jpg\|P P Spray and P P Sponging being applied to jeans to give
them a new look. <File:3D> Crinkle on Dummy.jpg\|Adding 3D crunching,
whiskers, and wrinkles to jeans to make them look more used.
<File:Crinkle> on Denim Jeans Pant.JPG\|Applying permanent wrinkles to
jeans. <File:Hand> Sanding on Denim Jeans.JPG\|Hand scraping of jeans.
<File:Curing.JPG%7CResin> treatment process on jeans.
<File:Tagging.JPG%7CTacking> on jeans (adds strength to high-stress
areas). <File:Denim> Washing.JPG\|Socks dyeing machine in a washing
plant for washing jeans. <File:Denim> Jeans Pant.jpg\|The process of
washing and drying jeans. <File:Denima> Jeans Finishin.jpg\|The final
steps of preparing jeans for market. <File:Live> model Fitting of Ladies
Denim Pant.JPG\|Checking the fit on a live model. <File:Denim> Jeans
Pant QA checking.JPG\|Quality checking and quality assurance.
<File:Denim> Jeans Pant Display.JPG\|Jeans denim pants are displayed for
the buyer in the RMG factory showroom.

## See also

-   [Athleisure](Athleisure "wikilink")
-   [Baggy jeans](Baggy_jeans "wikilink")
-   [Daisy Dukes](Daisy_Dukes_(clothing) "wikilink")
-   [Denim skirt](Denim_skirt "wikilink") ("jean" skirt)
-   [Designer jeans](Designer_clothing#Designer_jeans "wikilink")
-   [Drainpipe jeans](Drainpipe_jeans "wikilink")
-   [Jeggings](Jeggings "wikilink")
-   [Mom jeans](Mom_jeans "wikilink")
-   [Western fashion](Western_wear "wikilink")
-   [Trousers as women's
    clothing](Trousers_as_women's_clothing "wikilink")
-   [Jorts](Jorts "wikilink")

## Notes

## References

## External links

[Category:1870s fashion](Category:1870s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Jeans](Category:Jeans "wikilink") [Category:Trousers and
shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink") [Category:History of
fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Western
wear](Category:Western_wear "wikilink") [Category:American
fashion](Category:American_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Canadian
fashion](Category:Canadian_fashion "wikilink") [Category:American
inventions](Category:American_inventions "wikilink")
[Category:California Gold
Rush](Category:California_Gold_Rush "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")

[1]

[2] See, e.g., The Richmond Enquirer (Richmond, VA) March 25, 1823,
wherein a paid notice described the ready-made apparel stolen by a thief
: FIFTY DOLLARS REWARD, FOR JEREMIAH, or as he is commonly called Jerry
Hatcher, lately a convict of the Penitentiary, who on the night of the
17th February last did break through my store and carry off a variety of
goods, together with about $20 in change and some ready made clothing,
and has made his escape. He is about 4 1/2 or 5 feet high, stout and
very well made, with light hair, and I expect has on blue Jeans coatee
and brown pantaloons, as he took such from me and has been seen with
them on. I expect he is either in Richmond, Petersburg or Lynchburg. Any
person who will apprehend said Hatcher and deliver him to me, will meet
with my thanks, and the above reward. BRIGHTBERRY BROWN \[,\] Red Mills,
Buckingham \[County, Virginia\], March 14.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13] Wagman-Gellar, Marlene (2010). [*Eureka!: The Surprising Stories
Behind the Ideas That Shaped the
World*](https://books.google.com/books?id=IvRg_38ToLQC&pg=PT17), Eureka
#3 (1871) (unpaginated). Penguin Group (USA), Inc. Retrieved October 2,
2011.

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19] Sullivan, J. (2006). *Jeans: A cultural history of an American
icon*. New York: Gotham Books

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23] [Schober, Anna](Anna_Schober "wikilink") (2001). Blue Jeans. Vom
Leben in Stoffen und Bildern. Frankfurt/ New York: Campus.

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29] Elmar Steingruber "Indigo and Indigo Colorants" Ullmann's
Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry 2004, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim.

[30]

[31] *Der preis der Bluejeans* documentary by Studio Hamburg 2012

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46] Rudevich, Alexei. [Worth going to prison for: Getting hold of jeans
in the
USSR](http://rbth.com/arts/2014/09/16/worth_going_to_prison_for_getting_hold_of_jeans_in_the_ussr_39833.html).
Russia Beyond the Headlines, September 16, 2014. Accessed on November
16, 2014.

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]