![](Horse_riding_in_coca_cola_arena_-_melbourne_show_2005.jpg "fig:Horse_riding_in_coca_cola_arena_-_melbourne_show_2005.jpg")
competitor wearing contemporary stretch-fabric jodhpurs\]\]

**Jodhpurs**, also called breeches (English riding pants) in their
modern form, are tight-fitting trousers that reach to the ankle, where
they end in a snug cuff, and are worn primarily for [horse
riding](equestrianism "wikilink"). The term is also used as slang for a
type of short [riding boot](riding_boot "wikilink"), also called a
*paddock boot* or a *[jodhpur boot](jodhpur_boot "wikilink")*, because
they are worn with jodhpurs.

Originally, jodhpurs were snug-fitting from just below the knee to the
ankle, and were flared at the hip to allow ease for sitting in the
saddle. Modern jodhpurs are made with stretch fabric and are tight
fitting throughout. They are supportive and flexible.[1]

## History

![](MarwariHorseRajasthan.jpg "fig:MarwariHorseRajasthan.jpg") in
Rajasthan. Note the traditional long riding trousers, tight around the
calf, reaching to [Mojari](Mojari "wikilink") slippers.\]\]

Jodhpurs were adapted from traditional clothing of the Indian
subcontinent[2] as long trousers, reaching to the ankle, snug from the
calf to the ankle, with reinforced fabric protecting the inner calf and
knee from rubbing. The thighs and hips were flared, a traditional South
Asian style that allowed free movement of the hip and thigh while
riding.

The jodhpurs were adapted from an ancient style of Indian trouser called
the [Churidar](Churidar "wikilink"), which is tight around the calf and
loose at the hips. It is still worn at traditional Jodhpury weddings.[3]
This is a special traditional style of clothing in Northern India,
especially in what is today the modern state of
[Rajasthan](Rajasthan "wikilink"). Its capital is Jaipur. [Sir Pratap
Singh](Pratap_Singh_of_Idar "wikilink"), a younger son of the [Maharaja
of Jodhpur](Jodhpur_State "wikilink"), popularised in England the style
of riding-trousers worn in [Jodhpur](Jodhpur "wikilink"), a design that
he apparently improved and perfected and first had tailored in India
around 1890.[4][5]

Singh was an avid [polo](polo "wikilink") player. When he visited [Queen
Victoria](Queen_Victoria "wikilink") in England during her [Diamond
Jubilee](Diamond_Jubilee "wikilink") celebrations of 1897, he brought
his entire polo team, who caused a sensation among the fashionable
circles of the United Kingdom by their riding clothes. In addition, they
won many polo matches.[6] Singh's jodhpur style of flared thigh and hip
was rapidly taken up by the British polo-playing community, who adapted
it to the existing designs of English [breeches](breeches "wikilink"),
which ended snugly at mid-calf, and were worn with tall [riding
boots](riding_boot "wikilink").

The full-legged design of the true Jodhpur was not adopted as British
polo apparel. Early photographs of European polo teams show the
continued use of tall boots and breeches. Though the term "jodhpurs" was
applied [colloquially](colloquialism "wikilink") to this style of
breeches, they were not true jodhpurs and are more accurately termed
"flared-hip breeches". This British version was soon being produced by
[Savile Row](Savile_Row "wikilink") tailors in London. The use of the
Indian-style, ankle-length Jodhpurs allowed riders to use short, less
expensive boots, as their calves were protected by the reinforced design
and snug fit.

## Use

### Riding

![](Jodhpurs_(PSF).png "fig:Jodhpurs_(PSF).png") Special adaptations for
riding include a pattern cut with the leg seams on the outside of the
leg; a patch on the inside of the knee, sometimes of a hard-wearing
material such as leather; and in some cases similar leather or
leather-like panel on the seat that helps the rider stay still in the
saddle. Classic jodhpurs are beige or white, but for working purposes
are now made in a variety of colours.[7] They are particularly
well-suited for children, as the shorter paddock boots cost less than
tall boots to replace as a child's feet grow.

![](HalfChaps1.jpg "fig:HalfChaps1.jpg") if
[half-chaps](chaps "wikilink") are added which provide the functionality
and look of a tall riding boot\]\]

The word "jodhpurs" is often used interchangeably with riding
[breeches](breeches "wikilink"), though this is technically incorrect.
Breeches are riding pants that come down to about mid-calf, and are
designed to be worn with long stockings and tall boots. Jodhpurs are
ankle length and are worn with short, ankle-high [Jodhpur
boots](Jodhpur_boot "wikilink"), also known as Paddock Boots. Sometimes
knee-length [half-chaps](chaps "wikilink") or leggings may be added.[8]

### Occupational uniform

Jodhpurs are sometimes worn as fashion or occupational clothing, not
only for riding. In popular culture, jodhpur-style breeches worn with
tall boots became particularly associated with military officers, who
wore uniforms based on riding apparel, often derived from the
aristocratic [cavalry](cavalry "wikilink") tradition from which many
nations historically drew their corps of top commanders, viz. the
quartering of the [Commander-in-Chief of the
Forces](Commander-in-Chief_of_the_Forces "wikilink") and [Secretary at
War](Secretary_at_War "wikilink") in the [Horse
Guards](Horse_Guards_(building) "wikilink") building and the derivation
of the rank and title [marshal](Marshal#Military "wikilink") from what
was originally a title for the commander of cavalry.[9]

Flared-hip breeches and tall boots formed part of the military uniform
of army officers in [Imperial Germany](German_Empire "wikilink"),[10]
the [Second Polish Republic](Second_Polish_Republic "wikilink"), [11]
[Nazi Germany](Nazi_Germany "wikilink"), and many [Eastern
Bloc](Eastern_Bloc "wikilink") countries, including the former USSR and
East Germany,.

Jodphurs, or flared-hip breeches, also were adopted as the uniform for
some forces of motorcycle police.

The style came to be associated with authority figures in general and
was copied by certain [Hollywood](Hollywood "wikilink") movie directors
in the United States.
![](Cecil_B_DeMille_1937.JPG "fig:Cecil_B_DeMille_1937.JPG"), 1937,
wearing the flared-hip riding breeches that are often termed
jodphurs\]\]. Early 20th-century African big game hunters are also
associated with the look, due in part to early traditions of riding on
horseback in search of quarry. In addition, tall boots protected against
snakes and rough or thornbushes if the hunters were walking in rough
country.

### Fashion

![](1920s_woman_in_pants.jpg "fig:1920s_woman_in_pants.jpg"), they
adopted the use of breeches similar to those worn by men.\]\] Ladies
began wearing jodhpurs during the 1920s, as they shifted away from
riding horses [sidesaddle](sidesaddle "wikilink") and rode them astride.
One of the first high-profile women to adopt the wearing of jodhpurs was
[Coco Chanel](Coco_Chanel "wikilink"). She was inspired to copy the
breeches as worn by a friend's groom.[12]

As part of the 20th-century trend of crossover fashions moving from
sportswear to streetwear, various designers since the later 20th century
have incorporated equestrian styles into their clothing, including
jodhpurs. [Ralph Lauren](Ralph_Lauren "wikilink") is the most well-known
of such designers, and adapted equestrian styles and motifs as the basis
of his Ralph Lauren Polo line. (Polo/Ralph Lauren presented "Man and the
Horse", an exhibit of riding clothing and accoutrements from three
centuries at the [Metropolitan Museum of New
York](Metropolitan_Museum_of_New_York "wikilink") Costume Institute in
1984, curated by [Diana Vreeland](Diana_Vreeland "wikilink").)[13]

## Kentucky jodhpurs

![](Lindsey_on_horse.jpg "Lindsey_on_horse.jpg")

**Kentucky Jodhpurs** are full-length riding pants designed exclusively
for [Saddle seat](Saddle_seat "wikilink") riding. Like [Hunt
Seat](Hunt_Seat "wikilink") jodhpurs, they are close-fitting from waist
to ankle. They are noticeably longer, ending with a flared bell bottom
that fits over a [jodhpur boot](chelsea_boot "wikilink"), usually
extending below the heel of the boot in back, and covering the arch of
the foot (but not the toe) in front. The overall look gives the
impression of a rider with a long leg and heel lower than the toe, a
desired [equitation](equitation "wikilink") standard for this riding
style. Like the hunt seat jodhpur, they have elastic straps that run
under the boot to help hold the pant leg in place.[14] Saddle seat
riders, whose riding clothing styles were derived from men's business
suits, wear Kentucky Jodhpurs in dark colors, usually black, navy blue,
or a shade that matches the riding coat.[15]

## References

## External links

[Category:Sports clothing](Category:Sports_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:Breeches](Category:Breeches "wikilink")
[Category:Jodhpur](Category:Jodhpur "wikilink") [Category:Indian English
idioms](Category:Indian_English_idioms "wikilink")

[1] Price, Steven D. (ed.) *The Whole Horse Catalog: Revised and
Updated* New York:Fireside 1998 p. 215

[2] [Horse Riding
Jodhpurs](http://www.onlineforequine.co.uk/rider-clothing/horse-riding-clothing/jodhpurs-breeches),
Online for Equine

[3]

[4]

[5] Photographs exist of Sir Pratap Singh mounted on a horse, apparently
in England, wearing his tight-calfed riding trousers with traditional
Indian riding footwear rather than tall boots, dated 1917 & 1918.
[1](http://www.gettyimages.co.uk/detail/104416011/Gamma-Keystone)[2](http://www.gettyimages.co.uk/detail/3096959/Hulton-Archive)
Images, Hulton Archives: 7 March 1917, Sir Pratap Singh on Horseback,
Editorial Image #3096959; & gettyimages.co.uk image # 104416011, 1 Jan
1918

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15] Crabtree, Helen K. *Saddle Seat Equitation: The Definitive Guide*
Revised Edition; New York: Doubleday, 1982 p. 92-100