![](After_midnight_April_17,_1912,_and_still_selling_extras._There_were_many_of_these_groups_of_young_news-boys_selling_very_late_these_nights._Youngest_boy_in_the_group_is_Israel_Spril_(9_yrs._LOC_cph.3b08442.tif "After_midnight_April_17,_1912,_and_still_selling_extras._There_were_many_of_these_groups_of_young_news-boys_selling_very_late_these_nights._Youngest_boy_in_the_group_is_Israel_Spril_(9_yrs._LOC_cph.3b08442.tif")

**Knickerbockers** or **knickers** are a form of men's or boys'
baggy-kneed [trousers](trousers "wikilink") particularly popular in the
early 20th century [United States](United_States "wikilink").
[Golfers](Golf "wikilink")' *[plus twos](plus_twos "wikilink")* and
*[plus fours](Plus-fours "wikilink")* are
[breeches](breeches "wikilink") of this type. Before [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink"), [skiers](skiing "wikilink") often wore
knickerbockers too, usually ankle-length.

Until after [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink"), in many
[English-speaking](English-speaking "wikilink") countries (excluding
Britain), boys customarily wore [short pants](short_pants "wikilink") in
summer and knickerbockers ("knickers" or "knee pants") in winter. At the
onset of puberty, they graduated to long trousers. In that era, the
transition to "long pants" was a major rite of passage.[1][2] See, for
example, the classic song "[Blues in the
Night](Blues_in_the_Night "wikilink")" by [Johnny
Mercer](Johnny_Mercer "wikilink"): "My mammy done told me, when I was in
knee-pants, my mammy done told me, son..."

In Britain, they are always called knickerbockers (in [British
English](British_English "wikilink") "knickers" are women's underwear).
The fashion was imported from the US around the 1860s and continued
until the 1920s, when it was superseded by above-knee length short
trousers (shorts), probably due to the popularity of the scouting
movement whose uniform included shorts. Towards the end of this period,
knickerbockers may have been more of a "fancy dress" item, for formal
occasions, rather than everyday wear. At around 13 years, boys exchanged
their knickerbockers for long trousers (again, in British English, never
"pants", as above).[3] Today, knickerbockers are sometimes worn for
walking or golf.

Baseball players wear a stylized form of knickerbockers, although the
pants have become less baggy in recent decades and some modern
ballplayers opt to pull the trousers close to the ankles. The white
trousers worn by [American football](American_football "wikilink")
[officials](official_(American_football) "wikilink") are knickerbockers,
and while they have become less baggy, they are still worn ending
shortly below the knee. In recent years, the [NFL](NFL "wikilink") has
equipped its officials with long trousers rather than knickers in cold
weather.

## History

![](MDafoeMay1924Crop.jpg "fig:MDafoeMay1924Crop.jpg") The name
"Knickerbocker" first acquired meaning with [Washington
Irving](Washington_Irving "wikilink")'s *History of New York,* which
featured the [fictional author](fictional_character "wikilink")
[Diedrich Knickerbocker](Diedrich_Knickerbocker "wikilink"), an
old-fashioned Dutch New Yorker in Irving's satire of chatty and
officious local history.[4] In fact, Washington Irving had a real friend
named [Herman Knickerbocker](Herman_Knickerbocker "wikilink")
(1779–1855), whose name he borrowed. Herman Knickerbocker, in turn, was
of the [upstate](New_York_State "wikilink") Knickerbocker clan, which
descended from a single immigrant ancestor, [Harmen Jansen van Wijhe
Knickerbocker](Harmen_Jansen_Knickerbocker "wikilink"). Jansen van Wijhe
invented the name upon arriving in [New
Amsterdam](New_Amsterdam "wikilink") and signed a document with a
variant of it in 1682.

After Irving's *History*, by 1831 "Knickerbocker" had become a local
byword for an imagined old Dutch-descended New York aristocracy, their
old-fashioned ways, their long-stemmed pipes, and
[knee-breeches](breeches "wikilink") long after the fashion had turned
to slacks. (Such cultural heritage sprang almost entirely from Irving's
imagination and became a well-known example of an invented tradition.)
"Knickerbocker" became a byword for a New York patrician, comparable to
a "[Boston Brahmin](Boston_Brahmin "wikilink")".[5]

Thus the "[New York Knickerbockers](New_York_Knickerbockers "wikilink")"
were an amateur social and athletic club organized by Alexander
Cartwright on Manhattan's (Lower) East Side in 1842, largely to play
"[base ball](History_of_baseball "wikilink")" according to written
rules, the first organized team in [baseball
history](History_of_baseball "wikilink"); on June 19, 1846 the New York
Knickerbockers played the first game of "base ball" organized under
those rules, in [Hoboken, New Jersey](Hoboken,_New_Jersey "wikilink"),
and were trounced, 23–1. The Knickerbocker name stayed with the team
even after it moved its base of operations to Elysian Fields at Hoboken,
N.J. in 1846. The baseball link may have prompted [Casey
Stengel](Casey_Stengel "wikilink") to joyously exclaim, "It's great to
be back as the manager of the Knickerbockers!" when he was named pilot
of the newborn [New York Mets](New_York_Mets "wikilink") in 1961.

Hence also the locally-brewed "Knickerbocker Beer" brewed by [Jacob
Ruppert](Jacob_Ruppert "wikilink"), the first sponsors of the TV show
*[Tonight!](The_Tonight_Show "wikilink")*;[6] hence the gossip columnist
"Cholly Knickerbocker", the pen name of [Igor
Cassini](Igor_Cassini "wikilink"); hence the extremely high-toned
[Knickerbocker Club](Knickerbocker_Club "wikilink") (still in a
neo-Georgian mansion on [Fifth Avenue](Fifth_Avenue "wikilink") at 62nd
Street, which was founded in 1871 when some members of the Union Club
became concerned that admission policies were not strict enough); and
hence the [New York Knicks](New_York_Knicks "wikilink"), whose corporate
name is the "New York Knickerbockers".

The Knickerbocker name was an integral part of the New York scene when
the [Basketball Association of
America](Basketball_Association_of_America "wikilink") granted a charter
franchise to the city in the summer of 1946. As can best be determined,
the final decision to call the team the "Knickerbockers" was made by the
club's founder, [Ned Irish](Ned_Irish "wikilink"). The team is now
generally referred to as the Knicks.

![](Alice_Manfield_-_Guide_Alice,_Mt_Buffalo,_c1900-30,_SLV.jpg "fig:Alice_Manfield_-_Guide_Alice,_Mt_Buffalo,_c1900-30,_SLV.jpg")
wearing a style of knickbockers in the early 20th century for her work
as a [mountain guide](mountain_guide "wikilink")\]\]

### Use in sporting endeavors

Knickerbockers have been popular in other sporting endeavors,
particularly golf, rock climbing, cross-country skiing, fencing and
bicycling.

Indeed, in cycling they were standard attire for nearly a hundred years,
with the majority of archival photos of cyclists in the era before
[World War I](World_War_I "wikilink") showing men wearing knickerbockers
tucked into long socks. They remained fairly popular in Britain (where
they were called "breeks" or "trews") in the years between World War I
and [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), but eventually were
eclipsed in popularity by racing tights, even among the vast majority of
cyclists who never raced. Invariably referred to as "knickers" in the
US, they lived on as a just-past-the-knee variant of racing tights
reserved for colder-weather riding.

Knickers are still worn as part of the conventional uniform in
[fencing](fencing "wikilink").
![](Fencing_knickers.jpg "fig:Fencing_knickers.jpg")

Knickerbockers are often worn in baseball as pants, a custom that has
been practiced even since long pants became widely used in the U.S. The
traditional knickerbockers of old were more like pants that had been
folded back with long socks.

### Style

During the early 1980s, media interest in the then-Lady [Diana
Spencer](Diana_Spencer "wikilink") brought a brief commercial revival of
the look in women's and unisex fashion both in Europe and North America,
particularly among the "town and country", "[New
Romantic](New_Romanticism "wikilink")", and
"[preppie](preppie "wikilink")" sets. However, by 1984 the style had
waned as more top-heavy styles with snug pants rendered the style
obsolete.

## In Japan

In [Japan](Japan "wikilink"), [tobi trousers](tobi_trousers "wikilink"),
similar to knickerbockers, are worn by construction workers, and their
popular length has significantly increased over time, lowering the baggy
part down the bottom of the leg like plus-fours and plus-sixes, and
sometimes to the feet like trousers.

## Knickers: Great Britain

In the [United Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink"),
[Ireland](Ireland "wikilink") and some
[Commonwealth](Commonwealth_of_Nations "wikilink") nations, the term
*knickers* is used for women's [undergarments](undergarment "wikilink").
Use of the term owes its origin to illustrator [George
Cruikshank](George_Cruikshank "wikilink"), who did the illustrations for
Washington Irving's droll *History of New York* when it was published in
London. He showed the old-time Knickerbockers in their loose Dutch
breeches, and by 1859, short loose ladies undergarments, a kind of
abbreviated version of [pantalettes](pantalettes "wikilink") or
[pantaloons](underpants "wikilink"), were *knickers* in England.

## See also

-   [Bloomers (clothing)](Bloomers_(clothing) "wikilink")
-   [Breeches](Breeches "wikilink")
-   [Jodhpurs](Jodhpurs "wikilink")
-   [Knickerbocracy](Knickerbocracy "wikilink")
-   [Plus fours](Plus_fours "wikilink")

## References

<references />

## External links

-   [pattern](http://www.return2style.de/swingstyle/knicker/knicker.htm)
-   [On-line Etymology
    Dictionary](http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=knickerbocker)
-   ["Knickerbocker: Origins of the
    name":](http://www.knic.com/Kn_Hist.htm) some New York colonial
    genealogy
-   [Tim Wiles, "Letters in the
    Dirt:"](http://www.baseball1.com/twiles/dirt14.html) no. 14
-   ["Japanese Construction Worker
    Fashion"](http://pingmag.jp/2006/01/18/construction-worker-fashion/)
-   [Knickers](http://histclo.com/Style/pants/knick/knick.html) From the
    Historical Boys' Clothing website
-   [Why
    Knickerbockers?](https://amundsensports.com/2017/09/whyknickerbockers/)

[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:Undergarments](Category:Undergarments "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1]

[2] Compare transition to "long pants" with "[Breeching
(boys)](Breeching_(boys) "wikilink")."

[3]

[4] "[knickerbocker](http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/knickerbocker)".
Dictionary.com Unabridged (v 1.1). Random House, Inc. retrieved 2008-1-3

[5] Frederic Cople Jaher, "Nineteenth-Century Elites in Boston and New
York", *Journal of Social History* **6**.1 (Autumn 1972), pp. 32–77.

[6] ["Tonight!" Knickerbocker Beer Show,
1953](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0866345/).