![](Mannequin_with_jeans.jpg "fig:Mannequin_with_jeans.jpg") with
low-rise pants.\]\]

**Low-rise pants**, also known as "low-cut jeans", "lowriders" or "rap
pants", are a type of [pants](trousers "wikilink") that sit
[low](low-rise_(fashion) "wikilink") on, or below, the
[hips](Hip_(anatomy) "wikilink"), usually at least 8 centimetres
(3 inches) lower than the [navel](navel "wikilink"). Low-rise pants have
been available since the 1900s, in styles for both men and women, with
popularity increasing in the 2000s.

## Terminology

The "rise" of any bottom apparel is determined by the distance between
the [crotch](crotch "wikilink") and the [waist](waist "wikilink") and is
usually around 30 cm (12 inches) on regular pants. In comparison, the
average measurement of low-rise trousers is roughly 20 cm (8 inches),
with some as little as 7–10 cm (3-4 inches). Several jeans brands also
reflect the rise on the [zipper](zipper "wikilink"), by creating pants
with zippers far shorter than regular pants, usually between 5 and 7 cm
(2-3 inches), and some manufacturers, such as [Dorinha Jeans
Wear](Dorinha_Jeans_Wear "wikilink"), even provide 2.5 cm (1 inch)
zippers. The latter can also be classified as "ultra low-rise jeans",
and the small zipper no longer has its traditional function, but is
rather a display of fashion.[1]

## History

<img src="Red_evening_bodysuit_with_integrated_bra_-_Backside_-_modeled_by_Marina_Daschner.jpg" title="fig:Red_evening_bodysuit_with_integrated_bra_-_Backside_-_modeled_by_Marina_Daschner.jpg" width="150" alt="Red_evening_bodysuit_with_integrated_bra_-_Backside_-_modeled_by_Marina_Daschner.jpg" />,
a fashion Item onward from the 1950's to mid 1990's and again before
entering the 2010's, that covers the bottom cleft of women. Here in red
as a variant for evening wear\]\] [Hip-huggers](Hip-huggers "wikilink"),
the precursor to low-rise pants, rose to popularity during the mid 1960s
due to the mod subculture, and eventually by the hippies in the late
1960s. Often worn with light-[cotton](cotton "wikilink"),
[paisley](Paisley_(design) "wikilink")-printed tops or [nehru-collared
jackets](Nehru_jacket "wikilink"),
[bell-bottomed](bell_bottom "wikilink") hip-huggers were popularized by
rock icons such as [Jimi Hendrix](Jimi_Hendrix "wikilink"), [Janis
Joplin](Janis_Joplin "wikilink"), [Jim
Morrison](Jim_Morrison "wikilink"), and [Robert
Plant](Robert_Plant "wikilink"). Later, hip-huggers became a staple of
[popular culture](popular_culture "wikilink") and were incorporated into
the [disco](disco "wikilink") scene of the 1970s.[2]

During the late 1970s and early 1980s, however, waistlines moved higher
as wide, flared, bell-bottoms gradually gave way to
[designer](Designer_jeans "wikilink") straight-legged jeans. Throughout
the 1980s and into the 1990s, as more women entered the
[corporate](corporation "wikilink") workforce, the high waist design
remained predominant, with commercial designers such as [Gloria
Vanderbilt](Gloria_Vanderbilt "wikilink") and [Calvin
Klein](Calvin_Klein "wikilink") at the forefront.

The 1990s revival of low-rise jeans can be credited to British [fashion
designer](fashion_designer "wikilink") [Alexander
McQueen](Alexander_McQueen "wikilink"), who first showed his famous
low-rise "bumster" trousers in his 1996 "Taxi Driver" collection show.
One commentator observed: "The bumster for me is what defined McQueen.
For me it was the look that put him on the map because it was
controversial. Those little bumsters were in his first shows. It was
like 20 people in England were wearing them back then."[3][4] Following
McQueen's lead, the fashion of low-rise pants gradually spread. The
iconic low-rise fashion emerged in 2000, particularly among youth;
[Britney Spears](Britney_Spears "wikilink") is most credited with
popularizing the fashion in the US after she started wearing them that
same year.[5][6] Although its popularity also increased among women and
men of other ages, the major focus of advertising is still directed at
[teenage](teenager "wikilink") girls and boys, with typical teen stores
selling low-rise jeans in different styles and colors. Most American
teenage and twenty-something-oriented retail stores that carry jeans
(e.g., [Guess](Guess_(clothing) "wikilink"), [American
Eagle](American_Eagle_Outfitters "wikilink"), [Abercrombie &
Fitch](Abercrombie_&_Fitch "wikilink"),
[Stitches](Stitches_(store) "wikilink")) only or mostly carry low-rise
jeans.

## Styles

<img src="2001_Low-rise_jeans_and_thong_whale_tail.jpg" title="fig:2001_Low-rise_jeans_and_thong_whale_tail.jpg" width="150" alt="2001_Low-rise_jeans_and_thong_whale_tail.jpg" />,
an [early 2000s fashion](2000s_in_fashion "wikilink") trend referred to
as a [whale tail](whale_tail "wikilink")\]\] Low-rise jeans are
manufactured in many styles, including [boot-cut](boot-cut "wikilink"),
[flared](Bell-bottoms "wikilink"), loose, straight, baggy, skinny,
boyfriend, and slim. Due to the popularity of low-rise jeans,
manufacturers have also begun making low-rise styles of other kinds of
pants, such as [cargo pants](cargo_pants "wikilink") and dress pants.

Low-rise jeans may be worn to display more skin at the waist, torso, and
hips. Accordingly, they are sometimes worn in combination with [crop
tops](crop_top "wikilink"), giving a glimpse of skin between the jeans
and the top, or (more commonly in the summer or in warmer countries)
showing their entire midriff including the [navel](navel "wikilink").
From 2001 to 2007, the low rise style frequently revealed the thong or
[G-string](G-string "wikilink") underneath, but after 2007 this fell out
of favor and thongs began their decline. When the wearer sits down or
bends forward, sometimes [cleavage](Buttock_cleavage "wikilink") is
visible. When a [thong](Thong_(clothing) "wikilink") is exposed above a
pair of low-rise jeans on the back, it is commonly referred to as a
[whale tail](whale_tail "wikilink"), due to its somewhat similar shape.
When boxer shorts become visible this is known as
"[sagging](Sagging_(fashion) "wikilink")". Because underwear was no
longer always hidden, more men and women choose their underwear to
function with their low-rise jeans.[7][8]

## Medical concerns

In the [Canadian Medical Association
Journal](Canadian_Medical_Association_Journal "wikilink") 2003, Dr.
Malvinder S. Parmar pointed out that wearing tight low-rise jeans may
put pressure on a sensory nerve, the [lateral cutaneous nerve of the
thigh](lateral_cutaneous_nerve_of_the_thigh "wikilink"), which can cause
[pain](pain "wikilink") and [paresthesia](paresthesia "wikilink") in the
nerve's area of distribution. This is known as [meralgia
paresthetica](meralgia_paresthetica "wikilink") and is associated with a
tingling or a burning sensation on the lateral aspect of the thigh. The
condition was diagnosed in three [obese](obese "wikilink") women who had
worn low-rise jeans for 6–8 months. The condition resolved itself after
they avoided wearing low-rise jeans for 4–6 weeks.

`Image:Gray826-LFC.png|Diagram of segmental distribution of the lateral cutaneous nerve (shaded) and other nerves of the right lower extremity. Front view.`
`Image:Gray826and831.PNG|Cutaneous nerves of the right lower extremity. Front and posterior views.`

## See also

-   [Navel in popular culture](Navel_in_popular_culture "wikilink")
-   [Hip-huggers](Hip-huggers "wikilink")
-   [Jean skirt](Jean_skirt "wikilink")
-   [Crop top](Crop_top "wikilink")
-   [Buttock cleavage](Buttock_cleavage "wikilink")
-   [Halterneck](Halterneck "wikilink")
-   [Muffin top](Muffin_top "wikilink")
-   [Sagging (fashion)](Sagging_(fashion) "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [telegraph.co.uk](telegraph.co.uk "wikilink") [Ultra-low bikini
    jeans - only for the
    daring](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/1900276/Ultra-low-bikini-jeans-only-for-the-daring.html)
-   [Canadian Medical Association
    Journal](http://www.cmaj.ca/cgi/content/full/168/1/16-a?maxtoshow=&HITS=10&hits=10&RESULTFORMAT=&fulltext=Meralgia+&searchid=1065740508042_3452&stored_search=&FIRSTINDEX=0&sortspec=relevance&resourcetype=1&journalcode=cmaj)
-   [The woes of low-rise pants-Has America's low-rise obsession gone
    too far?](http://www.slate.com/id/2089623/) - Amanda Fortini

[Category:Jeans by type](Category:Jeans_by_type "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink")

[1] [Good Girls Don't Have to Dress Bad: A Style Guide for Every Woman -
Shari Braendel](https://books.google.com/books?id=2HFOyFFv3wUC).

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6] *The Gilroy Dispatch* - Low-rise Jeans Unflattering to Moms - Thanks
a Lot, Britney Spears

[7] Janelle Brown, ["Here come the
buns"](http://www.salon.com/mwt/style/2002/05/28/booty_call/),
Salon.com, May 28, 2002.

[8] Jennifer D'Angelo, ["Cleavage Fashion Flips Upside
Down"](http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,40105,00.html), FOXNews.com,
December 5, 2001.