**Open-crotch pants** (), also known as **open-crotch trousers** or
**split pants**, are worn by [toddlers](toddler "wikilink") throughout
[mainland China](People's_Republic_of_China "wikilink").[1] Often made
of thick fabric, they are designed with either an unsewn
[seam](Seam_(sewing) "wikilink") over the buttocks and crotch or a hole
over the central buttocks. Both allow children to
[urinate](urination "wikilink") and [defecate](defecation "wikilink")
without the pants being lowered. The child simply
[squats](Defecation_postures#Squatting "wikilink"), or is [held by the
parent](Urination#Babies_and_toddlers "wikilink"), eliminating the need
for [diapers](diapers "wikilink"). The sight of the partially exposed
[buttocks](buttocks "wikilink") of *kaidangku*-clad children in public
places frequently astonishes foreign visitors, who often photograph
them;[2][3] they have been described as being "as much a sign of China
as [Chairman Mao](Mao_Zedong "wikilink")'s portrait looming over
[Tiananmen Square](Tiananmen_Square "wikilink")."[4]

In China they are often seen as a relic of the country's rural past,
with younger mothers, particularly in cities, preferring to diaper their
children instead. However, Western advocates of the [elimination
communication](elimination_communication "wikilink") method of [toilet
training](toilet_training "wikilink") have pointed to the advantages of
their use, specifically that children complete their toilet training
more quickly and at an earlier age. Other benefits claimed include the
elimination of [diaper rash](diaper_rash "wikilink") and reduction of
the environmental problems caused by disposable diapers. Some Western
parents have even begun putting their own children in *kaidangku*.[5]

## Use

[Toilet training](Toilet_training "wikilink") begins very early in
China, sometimes within days of birth and usually no later than a
month.[6] Frequently babies are held closely by parents, grandparents or
other [extended family](extended_family "wikilink") members caring for
them, sensitive to when they need to relieve themselves.[7] A child who
appears ready to urinate or defecate is held over the toilet or any
other receptacle available if a commode cannot be reached in time. The
adult makes a high-pitched soft whistle while holding the child in a
*bǎ* (), or bunched-up position, a term sometimes used for the whole
process, imitating the sound of running water or urine, to get the child
to relax the appropriate muscles.[8][9]
![](Open-crotch_pants_-_for_3_to_6-month-old_-_01.jpg "fig:Open-crotch_pants_-_for_3_to_6-month-old_-_01.jpg")\|alt=A
set of children's pajamas lying on a bright surface with a price tag
still attached. The top is white with blue decoration; the pants are
light blue with white trim. They are open on both sides of the
crotch\]\] Open-crotch pants are worn when the child is first taken out
of the house. Mostly male children wear them; girls (and occasionally
some boys) are put in infant-size [sundresses](sundress "wikilink").[10]
Their use continues even after wearers have gained some control over
their bodily functions, since they may not have yet gained the stature
or [motor skills](motor_skill "wikilink") necessary to use a toilet.
Instead, when outdoors, they use a wastebasket or large potted plant. If
neither of those is available, caretakers often let the children use the
sidewalk or any other available uncovered surface and clean it up
themselves afterwards.[11]

## History

In 2003 *[The New York Times](The_New_York_Times "wikilink")* described
open-crotch pants as having been in use in China for "decades".[12]
Seven years earlier, in her memoir *[Red China
Blues](Red_China_Blues "wikilink")*, [Chinese
Canadian](Chinese_Canadian "wikilink") journalist [Jan
Wong](Jan_Wong "wikilink") speculates that their use evolved from
chronic shortages of cloth, soap and water. While those items were in
short supply, "people weren't" she wrote. "Someone was always available
to *ba* a Chinese baby."[13]

Their use continued during the 20th century as China modernized in other
ways. During the later years of [Mao Zedong](Mao_Zedong "wikilink")'s
rule, brightly colored *kaidangku* on the streets of
[Beijing](Beijing "wikilink") offered a sharp contrast to the austere
blue and gray tones of adult clothing prescribed by the [Cultural
Revolution](Cultural_Revolution "wikilink").[14] Even after the
[economic liberalizations](Chinese_economic_reform "wikilink") promoted
by [Deng Xiaoping](Deng_Xiaoping "wikilink") in the subsequent decades
and the ensuing introduction of more Western culture and ideas, they
remained in use for the vast majority of children in the [People's
Republic of China](People's_Republic_of_China "wikilink").[15] When
Wong, then a Chinese correspondent for [Toronto](Toronto "wikilink")'s
*[The Globe and Mail](The_Globe_and_Mail "wikilink")*, bore a son in
Beijing in 1990, only one hotel in the city sold disposable diapers.
Since they charged US$1 apiece, she decided to toilet-train him the
traditional Chinese way.[16]

Western manufacturers of [consumer
products](consumer_product "wikilink"), including [disposable
diapers](disposable_diapers "wikilink"), continued to push for entry
into the vast Chinese market. In 1998 the American company [Procter &
Gamble](Procter_&_Gamble "wikilink") (P&G) was able to introduce its
popular [Pampers](Pampers "wikilink") brand to China; competitors soon
followed.[17] However, Chinese parents at first saw no reason to abandon
*kaidangku* for diapers, and the company struggled to gain market share.
After re-engineering its diapers to be softer and selling them at a
lower price than it offered them for in the U.S., P&G launched its
"Golden Sleep" campaign in 2007[18] suggested by its [market
research](market_research "wikilink"), with advertisements claiming that
babies slept better in diapers, which could in turn be better for their
[cognitive development](cognitive_development "wikilink").[19]

Even before that, attitudes had begun to change. Within five years of
Pampers' introduction, about $200 million in disposable diapers were
being sold in China annually, and many manufacturers reported their
sales were growing by double-digit percentages. One of the foreign
manufacturers, Japan's [Unicharm](Unicharm "wikilink"), said in 2002
that its MamyPoko brand was so popular it was planning to build a plant
in China to make them. The shift in attitudes had drastically reduced
the use of open-crotch pants—upscale retailers no longer carried them,
and Chinese parenting magazines depicted babies wearing diapers
exclusively.[20]

Attitudes among Chinese had changed, as well. Mothers the *Times* talked
to in 2003 dismissed *kaidangku* as out of step with the values of
China's growing middle class. "Split pants? That's so old-fashioned!"
one [Shanghai](Shanghai "wikilink") woman said. "It's not hygienic. It's
bad for the environment. Only poor people who live on farms wear
them."[21] A [Guangzhou](Guangzhou "wikilink") woman quoted in *[China
Daily](China_Daily "wikilink")* a year later agreed, calling them
"uncivilized". People who could afford to buy diapers for their children
did so, she asserted, and a Beijing [post-natal
care](Postpartum_period "wikilink") center advised mothers to use
diapers no matter what the cost.[22]

Zhao Zhongxin, an education professor at [Beijing Normal
University](Beijing_Normal_University "wikilink"), said open-crotch
pants had become an indicator of [socioeconomic
status](socioeconomic_status "wikilink") in the new China. "Children in
the cities do not wear *kaidangku* anymore. But children in the
countryside still do," he told *China Daily*. "This is the difference
between the minds and living conditions of rural people and urban
people," who, the paper added, might also be more mindful of
city-government campaigns for cleaner public spaces overall, especially
prior to the [2008 Summer Olympics](2008_Summer_Olympics "wikilink") in
Beijing, which included exhortations to parents to diaper their children
at least for the duration of the Games.[23] A spokeswoman for domestic
diaper maker Goodbaby admitted to the newspaper that it was harder to
overcome resistance to diaper use outside cities. "Some people,
especially farmers, may think they are too wasteful."[24]
![](Chinese_boy_with_open-crotch_pants_and_diaper.jpg "fig:Chinese_boy_with_open-crotch_pants_and_diaper.jpg")
Other mothers used both open-crotch pants and diapers depending on the
situation.[25] In 2003 the *Times* reported that they were still
frequently seen on hot days in Shanghai, although they were no longer
ubiquitous in those conditions. A [Zhejiang](Zhejiang "wikilink") woman
who ran a fruit stand in the city told the newspaper that she dressed
her son in them only in that weather, since it was more comfortable for
him and reduced the risk of [diaper rash](diaper_rash "wikilink").[26]
And one Beijing mother whom *China Daily* spoke to while she watched her
*kaidangku*-clad son at a Beijing playground dismissed opposition to the
pants. "Even if people don't think it looks good, that's a minority
opinion," she said. "This is a Chinese tradition."[27]

By the end of the decade Pampers had become the top-selling diaper brand
in China. Foreign and domestic observers alike confidently predicted the
demise of *kaidangku*. In 2010 *[Brandchannel](Brandchannel "wikilink")*
called them "a fading memory."[28] Yet reports from China early in the
next decade suggested their use continued.[29][30]

## Advantages and disadvantages

Despite the increasing prevalence of diaper use, which became a
$3-billion industry in the country by 2010,[31] enough Chinese parents
still use open-crotch pants, or consider doing so, for parenting
websites in that language to list their benefits and detriments to
better help parents make an informed decision. Among the former are that
their use offsets the infant's inability to communicate, eliminates the
need for scheduled toileting times and greatly reduces the need to wash
soiled clothing.[32] Most frequently cited is the ability to begin and
finish toilet training earlier. It is not uncommon for infants in
*kaidangku* to begin being toilet trained before their first birthday
and be fully trained around that milestone or shortly afterwards, before
most of their Western counterparts have even begun. During a 1981 visit
to a Beijing preschool, [Fox Butterfield](Fox_Butterfield "wikilink"),
then a Chinese correspondent for *[The New York
Times](The_New_York_Times "wikilink")*, reported that he expressed
skepticism from his own contemporaneous parenting experience over the
possibility that children that young could be successfully toilet
trained, only to have it immediately dispelled by a 14-month-old girl's
timely use of the [spittoon](spittoon "wikilink") provided for her.[33]

However, parents are cautioned that *kaidangku* can be dirtier, leading
to a higher risk of problems like [urethritis](urethritis "wikilink"),
[cystitis](cystitis "wikilink") and other complications of [urinary
tract infections](urinary_tract_infection "wikilink"). Children in them
are also believed to face a higher risk of
[frostbite](frostbite "wikilink") in winter, and
[163.com](163.com "wikilink") warns that boys with easy access to their
exposed genitals "can easily develop bad habits."[34] Goodbaby, the
Shanghai-based diaper maker, lists some other problems with open-crotch
pants on its website. In addition to the medical, sanitary and
environmental drawbacks, it says that they show no respect for the
child's privacy and that he may in the future be embarrassed by
photographs of himself wearing them, particularly as they become less
common. While it admits that *kaidangku* use results merely from
different cultural values and not ignorance, it counsels, "we must admit
foreign practices are more rigorous and show more respect for the
child."[35]

[Wong](Jan_Wong "wikilink"), in her memoir, describes another negative
side effect. In the early 1990s, she reported on China's leading
[penis-enlargement](Penis_enlargement "wikilink") surgeon. Many of his
patients were men who, as children on farms, suffered serious injury to
their organs when they squatted in their open-crotch pants in areas
where dogs or pigs ate their own [feces](feces "wikilink") and the
animals bit the boys' penises in the confusion. Some had never married
because of the injury. "China desperately needed a
[Pampers](Pampers "wikilink") factory, or at least a dog-food industry,"
she wrote.[36]

Lastly, in his 1996 memoir *The Attic*, artist Guanlong Cao recalls an
incidental benefit of *kaidangku* to his parents:

## Use in West

As Chinese parents were migrating from *kaidangku* to diapers, some
Western parents were going in the opposite direction, concerned about
the environmental impact of used diapers and the health effects on the
child. In her 2006 book *Diaper Free*, Ingrid Bauer bemoaned the
marketing success of diaper manufacturers in China. "The traditional
*kaidangku* have rapidly disappeared from the major cities in the last
half-decade and are rapidly being replaced by diapers ... Aggressive
advertisers create an impression that consumer products are vastly
superior to what mothers have practiced for eons and urge parents to buy
what they can barely afford," she wrote.[37]

Around that same time, inspired by the Chinese example, parents in the
U.S. and other Western countries began forming "diaper-free" [support
groups](support_group "wikilink") and practicing [elimination
communication](elimination_communication "wikilink") toilet training on
younger babies, using the *ba* whistling sound to incite urination. Some
that *The New York Times* talked to in 2005 suggested they had gone to
that city's [Chinatown](Chinatown,_Manhattan "wikilink") to purchase
open-crotch pants for their own children.[38] Western parents working in
China also saw the use of *kaidangku* up close, and in some cases
decided to emulate Chinese methods in toilet training their own
children.[39]

## See also

-   [Infant clothing](Infant_clothing "wikilink")
-   [Swaddling](Swaddling "wikilink"), a type of infant clothing once
    dismissed as old-fashioned but increasingly used

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:Infants' clothing](Category:Infants'_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Chinese clothing](Category:Chinese_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Toilet training](Category:Toilet_training "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36] Wong,
[505](https://books.google.com/books?id=NnEPOZPLyakC&pg=PT505).

[37]

[38]

[39]