dungaree}} ![](PalmercarpenterA.jpg "fig:PalmercarpenterA.jpg") wearing
overalls\]\] **Bib-and-brace overalls** (AE), **overalls** (AE), or
**dungarees** (BE) is a type of [garment](garment "wikilink") usually
used as [protective clothing](protective_clothing "wikilink") when
working. The garment is also referred to as a "pair of overalls" by
analogy with "pair of [trousers](trousers "wikilink")".[1]

Overalls were originally made of [denim](denim "wikilink"), but they can
also be made of [corduroy](corduroy "wikilink") or [chino
cloth](chino_cloth "wikilink"). Overalls were invented in the 1890s by
[Levi Strauss](Levi_Strauss "wikilink") and [Jacob
Davis](Jacob_W._Davis "wikilink") at [Levi Strauss &
Co.](Levi_Strauss_&_Co. "wikilink"), but they went through an evolution
to reach their modern form.[2] Initially only used for protective
clothing in work settings, they have become a garment of high fashion as
"potential cult items".[3]
![](Railway_workers_in_1920_overalls_advertisement.jpg "fig:Railway_workers_in_1920_overalls_advertisement.jpg")
adjusting track.\]\]

## History

### Beginnings

The exact beginnings of the wearing of overalls are unclear, but they
are mentioned in literature as early as 1776 as a protective working
garment commonly worn by slaves.[4]

The first evidence of overalls being mass-produced are those made by
Levi Strauss and Jacob Davis in the 1890s. The first
"[jeans](jeans "wikilink")" they invented were actually overalls ("waist
overalls" or "waist-high overalls"), consisting of suspenders attached
to denim pants with buttons. There was no top part with a bib.[5] From
the beginning, denim overalls were popular workers' garments due to
their durability. In fact, Levi, Strauss & Co.'s slogan in the
1880s-1890s was "Never Rip, Never Tear."[6]

In 1911, [Harry David Lee](Harry_David_Lee "wikilink") made the first
bib overalls, made of pants with pockets with a bib and straps over the
shoulders.[7]

In 1927, Lee's developed a "hookless fastener" and created "buttonless"
overalls. Zippers replaced buttons.[8] Soon after, Suspender buttons
were traded in for belt loops to attach over-the-shoulder straps.[9]

### The Great Depression

In the 1930s, the poorest segments of the American population wore
overalls: farmers, miners, loggers, and [railroad](railroad "wikilink")
workers.[10] They were most commonly worn by men and boys in the
[Southern United States](Southern_United_States "wikilink") and the
[Midwestern United States](Midwestern_United_States "wikilink"). They
can be seen in many of [Walker Evans](Walker_Evans "wikilink")'s
photographs.[11]

Bib overalls (in different colors and textiles) have become a popular
garment among American youth, from the 1960s onward.[12]

### 21st century

![](Diesel_Black_Gold_Fall-Winter_2010_112.jpg "fig:Diesel_Black_Gold_Fall-Winter_2010_112.jpg")
In the 21st century, overalls have evolved into a high fashion garment.
Designers such as [Stella McCartney](Stella_McCartney "wikilink")
feature them in ready-to-wear collections for men, women and children.
Stella McCartney's children's overalls sell for as much as $138.[13]
[Nordstrom](Nordstrom "wikilink") sells overalls for as much as
$1,080.[14]

## Brands

Lee's and Levi, Strauss & Co. were not the only companies making
overalls in the late 19th and 20th centuries.

-   One of the oldest brands of overalls, [OshKosh
    B'gosh](OshKosh_B'gosh "wikilink"), founded in 1895 in Wisconsin,
    specialized in hickory stripe (blue and white stripe) bib overalls.
    The company produced bib overalls for children in the late
    1960s.[15]
-   Larned, Carter & Co., a company from [Detroit](Detroit "wikilink"),
    called themselves the "World's Greatest Overall Makers". They
    marketed their products as uniforms for railroad workers.[16]
-   One of the biggest overall manufacturers was Blue Bell, which began
    in [North Carolina](North_Carolina "wikilink") in 1904. It was
    popular among railroad workers.[17]
-   Jellico Clothing Manufacturing Co., later renamed Big Ben, was a
    major competitor of Blue Bell. Big Ben bought Blue Bell in 1926 and
    continued under the name Blue Bell.[18] Blue Bell then bought the
    overalls company **Casey Jones**.[19]

## Garments adapted from the overall

![](Motorkleding_Salopette.JPG "fig:Motorkleding_Salopette.JPG")
rider\]\] *Shortalls* (a contraction of the words "short" and
"overalls") are overalls adapted so the part of the garment below the
waist is [shorts](shorts "wikilink").[20] They can be worn by
[toddlers](toddler "wikilink"), with "[crotch](crotch "wikilink") and
[leg](leg "wikilink") [snaps](snap_fastener "wikilink") to facilitate
[diaper](diaper "wikilink") changes."[21]

In *skirtalls,* the part of the garment below the waist is a skirt.[22]
In capri overalls, the legs are [capri
pants](capri_pants "wikilink").[23]

*[Salopettes](wikt:salopettes "wikilink")* is the French word for
bib-and-brace overalls. The word is used in English for a similar
garment to overalls worn for [sailing](sailing "wikilink"),
[skiing](skiing "wikilink"), [diving](Underwater_diving "wikilink") and
other heavy duty activities. They are made of wind-and-waterproof
trousers, traditionally with a high waist reaching to the chest and held
up by adjustable shoulder braces.[24][25]

Historically, military "overalls" were loose garments worn in the 18th
and early 19th centuries over soldiers' breeches and gaiters when on
active service or in barracks. After 1823, the term was replaced by that
of "trousers" in British Army documents, but it survives to the present
day in reference to the tight-fitting garments strapped under the
instep, worn as part of the [mess dress](mess_dress "wikilink") and
[full dress](full_dress "wikilink") uniforms of cavalry regiments.[26]

## References

## External links

[Category:Safety clothing](Category:Safety_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:1890s fashion](Category:1890s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Trousers
and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14] Nordstrom\|website=Nordstrom\|language=en\|access-date=November 13,
2017}}

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]