**Oxford bags** were a loose-fitting baggy form of
[trousers](trousers "wikilink") favoured by members of the [University
of Oxford](University_of_Oxford "wikilink"), especially undergraduates,
in [England](England "wikilink") during the early 20th century from the
mid-1920s to around the 1950s. The style had a more general influence
outside the University, including in America, but has been somewhat out
of fashion since then.

## Origins

It is sometimes said that the style originated from a ban in 1924 on the
wearing of [plus fours](plus_four "wikilink") by Oxford (and
[Cambridge](University_of_Cambridge "wikilink")) undergraduates at
lectures. The bagginess allegedly allowed plus fours to be hidden
underneath â€“ but the argument is undermined by the fact that the
trousers (especially in the early years) were not sufficiently
voluminous for this to be done with any success. Other theories include
claims that the style was invented by [Harold
Acton](Harold_Acton "wikilink") of [Christ
Church](Christ_Church,_Oxford "wikilink") or by [Bob
Boothby](Robert_Boothby,_Baron_Boothby "wikilink") of
[Magdalen](Magdalen_College,_Oxford "wikilink"); but there is evidence
of the term, at least, being used at significantly earlier dates.[1]

The original trousers were in circumference at the bottoms but became
increasingly larger to or more, possibly due to misunderstanding of the
measurement as the width rather than circumference.[2]

## Revival

The style made a comeback in 1970s [Britain](United_Kingdom "wikilink"),
among fans of [Northern soul](Northern_soul "wikilink"), a popular 1970s
music movement. The style was worn as a practical measure to enable fans
to make the energetic and elaborate dance moves associated with the
Northern soul scene.

## See also

-   [Debagging](Debagging "wikilink")

## References

-

## External links

-   Martin, Richard, [Oxford
    Bags](http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_g1epc/is_tov/ai_2419100927),
    *St James Encyclopedia of Pop Culture*.

-   McBain, Sophie, [The Importance of being
    Eccentric](https://web.archive.org/web/20060319051813/http://www.oxfordstudent.com/ht2006wk3/Features/the_importance_of_being_eccentric),
    *[The Oxford Student](The_Oxford_Student "wikilink")*.

-   Nolan, Carol, [Men's Fashion
    History](http://www.lindyhopping.com/fashionhistm.html), *Southern
    Californian Lindy Society*.

-   (1926 film).

[Category:1920s fashion](Category:1920s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1924 clothes](Category:1924_clothes "wikilink")
[Category:English clothing](Category:English_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:Terminology of the University of
Oxford](Category:Terminology_of_the_University_of_Oxford "wikilink")
[Category:History of the University of
Oxford](Category:History_of_the_University_of_Oxford "wikilink")

[1]

[2]