![](Artinstitportland2009palazzo.jpg "Artinstitportland2009palazzo.jpg")

**Palazzo pants** (, [Indian English](Indian_English "wikilink"):
**pantada**) are long women's trousers cut with a loose, extremely wide
leg that flares out from the waist.

Palazzo trousers are popular as a summer season style, as they are loose
and tend to be flattering in light, flowing fabrics that are breathable
in hot weather. [Silk crepe/crape](Crape "wikilink"),
[jersey](Jersey_(fabric) "wikilink"),[1] and other natural fibre
textiles are popular fabrics for this design. Palazzo trousers are less
frequently seen during the winter months, but they may be found in wool
or heavy synthetic fabrics as fine.

## History

Palazzo pants for women first became a popular trend in the late 1960s
and early 1970s.[2] The style was reminiscent of the wide-legged cuffed
trousers worn by some women fond of avant-garde fashions in the 1930s
and 1940s, particularly actresses such as [Katharine
Hepburn](Katharine_Hepburn "wikilink"), [Greta
Garbo](Greta_Garbo "wikilink") and [Marlene
Dietrich](Marlene_Dietrich "wikilink").[3] During the 1960s, some
upscale restaurants resisted modern fashion trends by refusing to admit
women wearing trousers, which were considered inappropriate by some
proprietors.[4] This posed a problem for women who did not want to wear
the skirt styles that were then in fashion. Some women opted to
circumvent restaurant bans on women in pants by wearing palazzo trousers
or [culottes](culottes "wikilink") as evening wear.[5]

Palazzo pants flare out evenly from the waist to the ankle, and are
therefore different from [bellbottoms](bellbottoms "wikilink"), which
are snug until they flare out from the knee.[6] Palazzo pants are also
not to be confused with *Gaucho trousers*, which only extend down to
mid-calf length. [Harem pants](Harem_pants "wikilink") are yet another
loose style, but they have a snug cuff around the ankles.[7]

## References

[Category:1960s fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6] Dervis, ["Bell Bottom
Blues."](https://web.archive.org/web/20060409134729/http://www.madetomeasuremag.com/features/pre2003/953843329.html)
Made to Measure Magazine (Mar. 23, 2000).

[7]