![](Parachutepants.gif "Parachutepants.gif")

**Parachute pants** are a style of [trousers](trousers "wikilink")
characterized by the use of [nylon](nylon "wikilink"), especially
[ripstop nylon](Ripstop#Ripstop_nylon "wikilink"). In the original
tight-fitting style of the early 1980s, "parachute" referred to the
pants' nylon material, similar to a parachute's. Parachute pants became
a [fad](fad "wikilink") in [US culture](US_culture "wikilink") in the
1980s as part of the increased popularity of
[breakdancing](breakdancing "wikilink").

The clothing company [Bugle Boy](Bugle_Boy "wikilink") manufactured the
pants in the early 1980s, although they were not the first company to
manufacture parachute pants. The company Panno D'or claims that they
invented them, though this may not be true. However, it *is* true that
Bugle Boy was the company that made them, seemingly overnight, immensely
popular. Bugle Boy parachute pants are identifiable as having the word
"Countdown" on a small tag above the rear pocket's zipper.

Teenage boys were the main wearers of parachute pants. They typically
cost $25-$30 a pair. During the height of their popularity, 1984-1985,
boys wearing parachute pants became ubiquitous. Bugle Boy did make pants
for girls and women, though they remained most popular with males. They
went out of fashion almost as quickly as they arrived, with the fad
lasting about two years. Their slim, fitted look was eventually
overtaken by much looser, baggy-style pants.[1] Parachute pants played a
pivotal role in [1980s fashion](1980s_in_fashion "wikilink").

## Functional clothing

Early breakdancers occasionally used heavy nylon to construct
[jumpsuits](jumpsuit "wikilink") or [trousers](trousers "wikilink") that
would be able to endure contact with the breakdancing surface while at
the same time decreasing friction, allowing speedy and intricate
"[downrock](downrock "wikilink")" routines without fear of friction
burns or wear in clothing. Some, possibly apocryphal, sources state that
genuine parachute nylon was cut and used to make such trousers possible.
In the early part of the 1980s, parachute pants were tight fitting. Due
to the use of nylon in [parachutes](parachute "wikilink"), the style of
pants became known as parachute pants. Often, early outfits were of a
single color or slightly patchwork in nature as they were sometimes made
of found materials.

When manufactured and marketed as fashionable clothing, parachute pants
were often constructed with lightweight synthetic fabrics, making this
variety of pants more suitable for fashion than breakdancing.

## See also

-   [Dance costume](Dance_costume "wikilink")
-   [Harem pants](Harem_pants "wikilink")

## References

[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1980s fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1990s fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1]