**Pencil Suit** is a variety of [salwar
kameez](salwar_kameez "wikilink") which has become a recent fashion
trend. This basically follows the principles of a [pencil
skirt](pencil_skirt "wikilink") and merges it with the traditional
salwar kameez.

While salwars are loosely fitted pants, pencil suits have tightly fitted
pants that follow the contours of the lady’s leg. It differs from the
[churidar](churidar "wikilink") only in the lack of the ruches or the
“churis” near the ankle. The kameez is of thigh length and has a side
seam left open below the waist-line. This attire is often marched with a
[dupatta](dupatta "wikilink") of matching or contrasting color.

As most of the designer suits, a pencil suit is also embellished with
beads, mirror work, [zardozi](zardozi "wikilink") or
[zari](zari "wikilink") work. Simple and plain variants of the suit are
also available for daily wear.

## Description

The pencil [pants](trousers "wikilink") are held up by a drawstring at
the [waist](waist "wikilink"). The pants are fitted tightly against the
contours of the lady’s leg and don’t have any extra cloth. Usually it is
made of stretchable material to aid the easy movement and not to cause
any discomfort to the lady while sitting down.

The pants completely narrow down towards the ankle and are held by a
buttoned cuff at the ends. While conventional salwar kameez employs
traditional cuts, crosscuts are used to stitch a pencil suit. This
version of salwar kameez accentuates the curves of the female wearing
it.

The kameez of the pencil suit is stitched as that of a regular
[kurta](kurta "wikilink"). Though the height of the kameez may vary
according to the taste of the wearer, the usual style is to have it
stitched at thigh length. A side seam is provided to aid easy movements
and usually starts at the waist line. Different necklines are
experimented with plunging [neckline](neckline "wikilink"), boat line,
high necks or mandarin neckline.

It is customary to wear a dupatta along with a pencil suit though it is
not mandatory. Nowadays the dupatta is just draped over the hands or
used as a [fashion accessory](fashion_accessory "wikilink"). The dupatta
are made in diaphanous, shimmery [fabrics](fabrics "wikilink") for this
reason.

## Pencil suit and Bollywood

Though the pencil suit was designed first by leading designers of the
[fashion](fashion "wikilink") industry, it became popularized only
through [Bollywood](Bollywood "wikilink"). After being adapted by some
famous lead protagonists of Bollywood, pencil suits became fashionable.

Apart from being worn in movies, the actresses opted for pencil suits to
be worn at public functions and events too. This further accelerated the
adaption of aencil suits into the wardrobe of college and officegoing
ladies.

## Difference between pencil suit and churidar

To a point the pencil suit can be called a variant of churidar; but a
pencil suit differs very much from the churidar, whose name derives
their name from the ‘churis’ or ruche they form as they end near the
ankle. Pencil suit lacks any type of ‘churi’ or any extra cloth.

Extra cloth is provided at the thigh in churidar to aid easy movements
and comfort to the lady wearing it. There is no extra cloth provision in
pencil suit, but for the ease of the wearer it is made of elastic
fabrics that can stretch easily.

[Category:Indian clothing](Category:Indian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Suits (clothing)](Category:Suits_(clothing) "wikilink")
[Category:Hosiery](Category:Hosiery "wikilink") [Category:Trousers and
shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")