![](NMA.0033818,_Fashion_Photo_by_Gunnar_Lundh_1936.jpg "NMA.0033818,_Fashion_Photo_by_Gunnar_Lundh_1936.jpg")

**Plus fours** are [breeches](breeches "wikilink") or trousers that
extend 4 inches (10 cm) below the [knee](knee "wikilink") (and thus four
inches longer than traditional
[knickerbockers](Knickerbockers_(clothing) "wikilink"), hence the name).
Knickerbockers have been traditionally associated with [sporting
attire](Sportswear_(activewear) "wikilink") since the 1860s. Plus fours
were introduced in the 1920s and became popular among
sportsmen--particularly [golfers](golf "wikilink") and game shooters--as
they allowed more freedom of movement than knickerbockers.[1]

An "extravagant, careless style that fit right in with the looser
fashions and lifestyles of the 1920s," plus fours were introduced to
[America](United_States "wikilink") by Edward, Prince of Wales (later
[Edward VIII](Edward_VIII "wikilink")) during a trip in 1924[2].

They were later brought back to prominence by the
[professional](professional "wikilink") golfer [Payne
Stewart](Payne_Stewart "wikilink") who wore them on the [PGA
Tour](PGA_Tour "wikilink") (active years 1982-1999).[3]

In 2008, plus fours were featured in [André
Benjamin](André_3000 "wikilink")'s Benjamin Bixby clothing line, which
was based on clothing worn by [Ivy League](Ivy_League "wikilink")
athletes in the 1930s.[4]

Less known are **plus twos,** **plus sixes,** and **plus eights,** of
similar definitions, but varying volumes.[5]

In [Nabokov's](Vladimir_Nabokov "wikilink") *[King, Queen,
Knave](King,_Queen,_Knave "wikilink"),*while his lover is dying of
pneumonia in a nearby hospital attended by her husband (his employer and
uncle), Franz busies himself arranging to buy a pair of plus fours, a
long-deferred dream.''

[Tintin](Tintin_(character) "wikilink"), the comic book character from
*[The Adventures of Tintin](The_Adventures_of_Tintin "wikilink")*,
famously wears plus fours.[6]

## References

[Category:Sports clothing](Category:Sports_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:Breeches](Category:Breeches "wikilink") [Category:Golf
equipment](Category:Golf_equipment "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")

[1] *Fashion Encyclopedia*, [Plus
fours](http://www.fashionencyclopedia.com/fashion_costume_culture/Modern-World-1919-1929/Plus-Fours.html).

[2]

[3] *Golf Today*, [Payne Stewart, a champion in plus
two's](http://www.golftoday.co.uk/news/yeartodate/news99/stewart3.html).

[4] Wilson, Eric. [André Benjamin’s Clothing Line Includes Plus Fours
and Club
Sweaters](https://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/02/fashion/02BIXBY.html?_r=1&oref=slogin),
*[The New York Times](The_New_York_Times "wikilink")*, October 2, 2008.

[5] "Esquire's encyclopedia of 20th century men's fashions," by O. E.
Schoeffler, William Gale, 1973,
[p.674](https://books.google.com/books?id=EStUAAAAMAAJ&q=%22plus-twos%22&dq=%22plus-twos%22&pgis=1)

[6]