![](Sagging_crop.jpg "fig:Sagging_crop.jpg") **Sagging** is a manner of
wearing [trousers](trousers "wikilink") or [jeans](jeans "wikilink")
that [sag](Wikt:sag#Verb "wikilink") so that the top of the trousers or
jeans are significantly below the waist, sometimes revealing much of the
underwear.

Sagging is predominantly a male fashion. Women's wearing of [low-rise
jeans](low-rise_jeans "wikilink") to reveal their
[G-string](G-string "wikilink") underwear (the "[whale
tail](whale_tail "wikilink")") is not generally described as sagging.[1]
A person wearing sagging trousers is sometimes called a "sagger",[2] and
in some countries this practice is known as "low-riding".[3][4]

## Origin

The style was popularized by skaters and [hip-hop](hip-hop "wikilink")
artists in the 1990s.[5][6] It later became a symbol of freedom and
cultural awareness among some youths[7] or a symbol of their rejection
of the values of mainstream society.[8]

It is often claimed the style originated from the United States prison
system where [belts](Belt_(clothing) "wikilink") are sometimes
prohibited[9] and there can be a lack of appropriately sized clothing.
[10][11]

## Reaction

During the 2000s, many North American local governments, school systems,
transit agencies, and even airlines passed laws and regulations against
the practice of wearing sagging pants, although no state or federal laws
have been enacted banning the practice.[12] US presidential candidate
[Barack Obama](Barack_Obama "wikilink"), speaking just before the [2008
US Presidential
Election](United_States_Presidential_Election,_2008 "wikilink"),
appeared on [MTV](MTV "wikilink") and said that laws banning the
practice of wearing low-slung pants that expose one's underwear were "a
waste of time ... Having said that, brothers should pull up their pants.
You are walking by your mother, your grandmother, your underwear is
showing. What's wrong with that? Come on. Some people might not want to
see your underwear. I'm one of them."[13]

In June 2007 the Town Council of [Delcambre,
Louisiana](Delcambre,_Louisiana "wikilink"), passed an [indecent
exposure](indecent_exposure "wikilink") ordinance, which prohibited
intentionally wearing trousers in such a way as to show underwear.[14]
In March 2008 the [Hahira, Georgia](Hahira,_Georgia "wikilink") City
Council passed a controversial clothing ordinance, in the name of public
safety, that bans citizens from wearing pants with top below the waist
that reveal skin or undergarments. The council was split 2–2, but the
tie was broken by the mayor.[15] [Pagedale,
Missouri](Pagedale,_Missouri "wikilink") is also another to have passed
this law in 2008 [16][17]

Benetta Standly, statewide organizer for the [American Civil Liberties
Union](American_Civil_Liberties_Union "wikilink") of Georgia stated, "In
Atlanta, we see this as [racial profiling](racial_profiling "wikilink")
... It's going to target African-American male youths. There's a fear
with people associating the way you dress with crimes being
committed."[18] The interim police chief of [Flint,
Michigan](Flint,_Michigan "wikilink") ordered the arrest of saggers for
disorderly conduct; however, , only warnings had been issued. The local
chapter of the ACLU threatened legal action in response, saying that
sagging did not violate the Flint disorderly conduct ordinance[19] and a
Florida judge threw out a case brought under a similar rule, as being
unconstitutional.[20]

Sagging clothing is a violation of some school dress
codes,[21][22][23][24] and the prohibition has been supported in the
court system.[25]

Two weeks after the "[Pants on the
Ground](Pants_on_the_Ground "wikilink")" video became popular thanks to
*[American Idol](American_Idol "wikilink")* (*see below*), a
[billboard](billboard "wikilink") campaign against the style of sagging
pants was launched in the [Dallas, Texas](Dallas,_Texas "wikilink"),
area. The billboards feature [Big Mama
Joseph](Josephine_Joseph_(Soul_Food) "wikilink") from the 1997 film
*[Soul Food](Soul_Food_(film) "wikilink")* saying, "Pull 'Em Up!" and
asks youngsters to "Keep it a secret!" The campaign is the brainchild of
Dallas Mayor Pro Tem Dwaine R. Caraway, and uses advertising space
donated by [Clear Channel Outdoor](Clear_Channel "wikilink").[26]
Another billboard campaign against sagging pants was launched in
[Brooklyn](Brooklyn "wikilink"), [New York](New_York_(state) "wikilink")
by New York [State Senator](State_Senator "wikilink") [Eric
Adams](Eric_Adams_(politician) "wikilink") on March 28, 2010.[27] In May
2010 New York State Senate President [Malcolm
Smith](Malcolm_Smith_(U.S._politician) "wikilink") used
[US$](US$ "wikilink")2,200 from his campaign fund to launch a similar
campaign in [Queens](Queens "wikilink").[28]

At the [2010 Winter Olympics](2010_Winter_Olympics "wikilink") in
[Vancouver](Vancouver "wikilink"), Japanese
[snowboarder](snowboarding "wikilink") [Kazuhiro
Kokubo](Kazuhiro_Kokubo "wikilink") was barred from participating in the
opening ceremonies due to dressing sloppily, including a loosened tie,
shirt hanging out, and sagging pants.[29]

In the fall of 2010 at Westside Middle School in [Memphis,
Tennessee](Memphis,_Tennessee "wikilink"), the policy on handling
sagging pants is for students to pull them up or get "Urkeled", a
reference to the character [Steve Urkel](Steve_Urkel "wikilink") of the
1990s television show *[Family Matters](Family_Matters "wikilink")*. In
this practice, teachers would pull their pants up and attach them there
using [zip ties](zip_tie "wikilink"). Students would also have their
photo taken and posted on a board in the hallway, for all of their
classmates to see. In an interview with [WMC-TV](WMC-TV "wikilink"),
Principal Bobby White stated that the general idea is to fight [pop
culture](popular_culture "wikilink") with pop culture.[30] One teacher
at the school claimed to have "Urkeled" up to 80 students per week,
although after five weeks students got the message, and the number
dropped to 18.[31]

On November 23, 2010, [Albany, Georgia](Albany,_Georgia "wikilink")
passed a city ordinance that banned the wearing of pants or skirts with
top more than three inches below the top of the hips, and imposed a fine
of $25 for the first offense, increasing to up to $250 for subsequent
offenses. By September 2011, City Attorney Nathan Davis reported that
187 citations had been issued and fines of $3,916 collected.[32]

On December 8, 2010, the city of [Opa-locka,
Florida](Opa-locka,_Florida "wikilink") voted unanimously on a $250 fine
or 10 hours of community service for individuals who did not pull their
pants up.[33]

In [Fort Worth, Texas](Fort_Worth,_Texas "wikilink"), the local
transportation authority implemented a policy in June 2011 that
prohibited any passenger from boarding a bus while wearing sagging pants
that exposes their underwear or buttocks. Signs were posted on buses
saying, "Pull 'em up or find another ride", and one City Council member
was looking for funds for a billboard campaign. The communications
manager for the Fort Worth Transportation Authority said that on the
first day the policy was enforced, 50 people were removed from buses for
wearing improper pants. Some complained about the policy, but the
overall response was positive.[34]

A state law went into effect in [Florida](Florida "wikilink") for the
2011–2012 school year banning the practice of sagging while at school.
Pupils found in violation receive a verbal warning for the first
offense, followed by parental notification by the principal for the
second offense, which will require the parent to bring a change of
clothing to school. Students would then face [in-school
suspension](Suspension_(punishment) "wikilink") for subsequent
violations.[35]

[University of New Mexico](University_of_New_Mexico "wikilink") football
player Deshon Marman was removed from a [U.S.
Airways](U.S._Airways "wikilink") flight bound for [Albuquerque, New
Mexico](Albuquerque,_New_Mexico "wikilink") for wearing sagging
pants.[36] A few months later [Green Day](Green_Day "wikilink") singer
[Billie Joe Armstrong](Billie_Joe_Armstrong "wikilink") was removed from
a [Southwest Airlines](Southwest_Airlines "wikilink") flight from
[Oakland](Oakland,_California "wikilink") to [Burbank,
California](Burbank,_California "wikilink") for the same reason.[37]

In April 2012 Alabama County Circuit Judge John Bush sentenced
20-year-old LaMarcus Ramsey to three days in jail for appearing in court
with sagging blue jeans that exposed his underwear, telling him, "You
are in [contempt of court](contempt_of_court "wikilink") because you
showed your butt in court."[38]

On June 12, 2013, the Town Council of [Wildwood, New
Jersey](Wildwood,_New_Jersey "wikilink"), located on the [Jersey
Shore](Jersey_Shore "wikilink"), voted unanimously to ban sagging pants
from the town's boardwalk.[39]

In [Ocala, Florida](Ocala,_Florida "wikilink"), a law was passed against
sagging jeans, violators face a $500 fine or up to six months in jail.
Something similar was done in Wildwood, New Jersey.[40]

On July 5, 2016 an ordinance was passed in Timmonsville, South Carolina
that punishes sagging pants. Offenders may face up to a $600 fine.[41]

[Shreveport, Louisiana](Shreveport,_Louisiana "wikilink") repealed its
prohibition on sagging pants in June 2019.[42]

## Music videos

![](Travis_Scott_sagging.jpg "fig:Travis_Scott_sagging.jpg") sagging his
pants while performing in 2015\]\] Sagging has been ridiculed in [music
videos](music_video "wikilink"), first in the 1996 song "Back Pockets on
the Floor" performed by the Green Brothers of [Highland Park,
Michigan](Highland_Park,_Michigan "wikilink").[43] Another song in 2007
by Dewayne Brown of [Dallas, Texas](Dallas,_Texas "wikilink"), titled
"Pull Your Pants Up", has a similar message.[44] On January 13, 2010,
["General" Larry Platt](Larry_Platt "wikilink") performed "[Pants on the
Ground](Pants_on_the_Ground "wikilink")" during auditions for the ninth
season of *[American Idol](American_Idol_(season_9) "wikilink")* in
[Atlanta, Georgia](Atlanta,_Georgia "wikilink").[45] In 2012 a
9-year-old rapper named Amor "Lilman" Arteaga wrote a song titled "Pull
Ya Pants Up," and made a music video with an appearance by Brooklyn
borough president [Marty Markowitz](Marty_Markowitz "wikilink").[46]

## See also

-   [Buttock cleavage](Buttock_cleavage "wikilink")
-   [Wide leg jeans](Wide_leg_jeans "wikilink")

## References

## External links

[Category:2000s fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2010s fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:African-American-related
controversies](Category:African-American-related_controversies "wikilink")
[Category:Clothing
controversies](Category:Clothing_controversies "wikilink") [Category:Hip
hop fashion](Category:Hip_hop_fashion "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3] ["Low-riding cool dudes told to hitch 'em
high"](http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=124699),
Jun 30, 2000, Angela Gregory, *NZ Herald*

[4] ["Undie-exposed for the
beach"](http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=584700),
Jan 1, 2002, Patrick Gower, *NZ Herald*

[5]

[6] "Teens' Sagging Jeans Not Just for 'Gangstas.'", Jennifer Skordas,
Salt Lake Tribune. 15 October 1995 (p. B1).

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16] <https://ecode360.com/29518559?highlight=pants#29518559>

[17] <https://www.watchdog.org/issues/accountability/nanny-state-of-the-week-city-fines-residents-for-chipped/article_7435d55a-20f5-5d03-bf82-7aebc47ca7fa.html>

[18]

[19]

[20] ["Judge rules saggy pants law
unconstitutional/"](http://www.nbcnews.com/id/26759466/ns/us_news-crime_and_courts/t/judge-rules-saggy-pants-law-unconstitutional/),
9/17/2008, NBC

[21]

[22] [Board Approves Dress Code
Changes](http://www.fresno.k12.ca.us/dresscode.html) , [Fresno Unified
School District](Fresno_Unified_School_District "wikilink"), 1993,
retrieved 2008-11-23

[23] [Central Unified School District Dress
Code](http://www.centralusd.k12.ca.us/dress_code.shtml) , [Central
Unified School District](Central_Unified_School_District "wikilink"),
retrieved 2008-11-23

[24] [Anderson Union High School District Dress Code
Guidelines](http://www.anderson.k12.ca.us/wvhs/documents/admin/dresscode.pdf),
[Anderson Union High School](Anderson_Union_High_School "wikilink")
district, 2008-08-20, retrieved 2008-11-23

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40] Demby, Gene. "Sagging Pants and the Long Histor of 'Dangerous'
Street Fashion." npr.org. 11 Sept. 2014. Web. 11 Apr. 2015.

[41] Ian Cross July 5, 2016 "South Carolina town passes ordinance
banning sagging pants"
<http://www.foxcarolina.com/story/32378388/south-carolina-town-passes-ordinance-banning-sagging-pants?clienttype=generic&sf30338757=1>

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]