![](Fisherman_pants.jpg "fig:Fisherman_pants.jpg") **Thai fisherman
pants** (, , ; , ) are lightweight [unisex](unisex "wikilink")
[trousers](trousers "wikilink") that are made very wide in the
[waist](waist "wikilink") so that one size fits all. The pants are
wrapped around the waist and ribbons are tied to form a belt. The excess
material is then folded over the knot.[1] Although traditionally used by
fishermen in [Thailand](Thailand "wikilink"), they have become popular
among others for casual, beach, and exercise wear as well as for
[backpacking](backpacking_(travel) "wikilink") and pregnancy.

Thai fishermen do in reality wear this style of pants. They are also
increasingly common among many men and women of all nationalities. This
style of trousers is usually made of [cotton](cotton "wikilink") or
[rayon](rayon "wikilink") but is also now widely available in a variety
of styles and fabrics, such as [hemp](hemp "wikilink"),
[bamboo](Bamboo_textile "wikilink"), or [linen](linen "wikilink").

Thai fisherman pants are very similar to the traditional attire of
[Intha](Intha_people "wikilink") males, who live on [Inle
Lake](Inle_Lake "wikilink") of [Myanmar](Myanmar "wikilink"). They are
known in [Burmese](Burmese_language "wikilink") as *Shan baun-mi*.[2]

## Uses

![](Thai-Fishermen-boat.jpg "fig:Thai-Fishermen-boat.jpg")
Traditionally, Thai Wrap Fisherman pants were adapted from
[Sarongs](Sarongs "wikilink") and were worn by Thai fisherman, (hence
the name), and farmers. This style of pants suit the tropical climate of
Thailand very well because they are light and airy, inexpensive to
produce, quick drying, secure and comfortable.

Other benefits of Thai wrap fisherman pants are that they are a true
one-size, unisex, garment that is fitted to the wearer each time they
are put on, they also allow completely free movement which makes them
perfect for many activities including [Tai Chi](Tai_Chi "wikilink"),
[Yoga](Yoga "wikilink"), [Meditation](Meditation "wikilink"), [Martial
Arts](Martial_Arts "wikilink"), Thai & Other
[Massage](Massage "wikilink"), Beach Pants, Maternity & Postpartum
clothing.

Today, for the above reasons, Thai wrap pants have caught on worldwide,
and wherever you live it is likely that you can find this type of wrap
pants online. Generally the most authentic and least expensive are
purchased directly from Thailand, and there are several vendors in
Thailand that ship very good quality pants internationally.

Thai pants are great pants for children and adults in 3/4 capri length,
or full length, also popular for the larger persons they can be supplied
extra large, (jumbo) size.
![](Childrens_Fisherman_Pants.jpg "fig:Childrens_Fisherman_Pants.jpg")

## References

[Category:Thai clothing](Category:Thai_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1]

[2]