![](Workers_in_tobi_pants.jpg "fig:Workers_in_tobi_pants.jpg") **Tobi
trousers** or **tobi pants** are a type of baggy pants used as a common
uniform of **, [construction workers](construction_worker "wikilink") in
[Japan](Japan "wikilink") who work on high places (such as
[scaffolding](scaffolding "wikilink") and
[skyscrapers](skyscraper "wikilink")).[1] The pants are baggy to a point
below the knees, abruptly narrowing at the calves so as to be put into
the footwear: high boots or [jika-tabi](jika-tabi "wikilink")
([tabi](tabi "wikilink")-style boots).

According to a spokesperson for [Toraichi](Toraichi "wikilink"), a major
manufacturer of worker's clothes of this style, the style was developed
from [knickerbockers](knickerbockers_(clothing) "wikilink") which were
part of [Japanese military
uniform](Uniforms_of_the_Imperial_Japanese_Army "wikilink") during
[World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"). The regular knickerbocker-style
pants are called **nikka zubon** ("zubon" means "trousers," and "nikka"
or "nikka-bokka" is a *[gairaigo](gairaigo "wikilink")-*transformation
of the word "knickerbockers"). The excessively widened ones are called
**chocho zubon**.[2] This style has also entered popular fashion,[3] as
evidenced by the emergence of *toramani* ("Toraichi maniacs"), die-hard
fans of Toraichi trousers.[4]

## References

[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:Japanese clothing](Category:Japanese_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2] ["Baggy
trousers"](http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/ek20051220wh.html),
*[Japan Times](Japan_Times "wikilink")*, December 20, 2005

[3] [1](https://web.archive.org/web/20150103025221/http://pingmag.jp/2006/01/18/construction-worker-fashion/),
*PingMag*, 18 January 2006 (retrieved October 29, 2018)

[4]