![](Trousers-colourisolated.jpg "fig:Trousers-colourisolated.jpg")
**Trousers** ([British English](British_English "wikilink")) or
**pants** ([American English](American_English "wikilink")) are an item
of [clothing](clothing "wikilink") that might have originated in
[Central Asia](Central_Asia "wikilink"), worn from the waist to the
ankles, covering both legs separately (rather than with cloth extending
across both legs as in [robes](robe "wikilink"),
[skirts](skirts "wikilink"), and [dresses](dress "wikilink")).

In the [United Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink"), the word *pants*
generally means [underwear](underwear "wikilink") and not trousers.[1]
[Shorts](Shorts "wikilink") are similar to trousers, but with legs that
come down only to around the area of the knee, higher or lower depending
on the style of the garment. To distinguish them from shorts, trousers
may be called "long trousers" in certain contexts such as [school
uniform](school_uniform "wikilink"), where tailored shorts may be called
"short trousers", especially in the UK.

The oldest known trousers were found at the Yanghai cemetery in
[Turpan](Turpan "wikilink"), [Xinjiang](Xinjiang "wikilink"), western
China and dated to the period between the 10th and the 13th centuries
BC. Made of wool, the trousers had straight legs and wide crotches and
were likely made for horseback riding.[2][3]

In most of [Europe](Europe "wikilink"), trousers have been worn since
ancient times and throughout the [Medieval](Medieval "wikilink") period,
becoming the most common form of lower-body clothing for adult males in
the modern world. [Breeches](Breeches "wikilink") were worn instead of
trousers in early modern Europe by some men in higher classes of
society. Distinctive [formal trousers](formal_trousers "wikilink") are
traditionally worn with [formal](formal_attire "wikilink") and
[semi-formal](semi-formal_attire "wikilink") [day
attire](Morning_dress "wikilink"). Since the mid-20th century, trousers
have increasingly been worn by women as well.

[Jeans](Jeans "wikilink"), made of denim, are a form of trousers for
casual wear widely worn all over the world by both sexes. Shorts are
often preferred in hot weather or for some sports and also often by
children and adolescents. Trousers are worn on the hips or waist and are
often held up by buttons, elastic, a [belt](belt_(clothing) "wikilink")
or [suspenders](suspenders "wikilink") (braces).

## Terminology

In [Scotland](Scotland "wikilink"), trousers are occasionally known as
*[trews](trews "wikilink")*, which is the historic root of the word
*trousers*. Trousers are also known as in
[Scots](Scots_language "wikilink"), a word related to *breeches*. The
item of clothing worn under trousers is
[underpants](underpants "wikilink"). The standard form *trousers* is
also used, but it is sometimes pronounced in a manner approximately
represented by , as Scots did not completely undergo the [Great Vowel
Shift](Great_Vowel_Shift "wikilink"), and thus retains the vowel sound
of the [Gaelic](Scottish_Gaelic "wikilink") from which the word
originates.

In North America, Australia, South Africa and Northern England *pants*
is the general category term, whereas *trousers* (sometimes *slacks* in
Australia and the United States) often refers more specifically to
[tailored](tailor "wikilink") garments with a waistband,
[belt](belt_(clothing) "wikilink")-loops, and a
[fly](fly_(clothing) "wikilink")-front. So informal elastic-waist
knitted garments would be called *pants*, but not *trousers* (or
*slacks*).

North Americans call undergarments *underwear*, *underpants*, *undies*,
or *panties* (the last are women's garments specifically) to distinguish
them from other pants that are worn on the outside. The term
*[drawers](Undergarment "wikilink")* normally refers to undergarments,
but in some dialects, may be found as a synonym for "breeches", that is,
trousers. In these dialects, the term *underdrawers* is used for
undergarments. Many North Americans refer to their undergarments by
their type, such as *[boxers](boxer_shorts "wikilink")* or
*[briefs](briefs "wikilink")*.

In [Australia](Australia "wikilink"), men's underwear also has various
informal terms including *under-dacks*, *undies*, *dacks* or *jocks*. In
[New Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink") men's underwear is known
informally as *undies* or *dacks*.

The words *trouser* (or *pant*) instead of *trousers* (or *pants*) is
sometimes used in the tailoring and fashion industries as a generic
term, for instance when discussing styles, such as "a flared trouser",
rather than as a specific item. The words *trousers* and *pants* are
*[pluralia tantum](pluralia_tantum "wikilink")*, nouns that generally
only appear in plural form—much like the words *scissors* and *tongs*,
and as such *pair of trousers* is the usual correct form. However, the
singular form is used in some compound words, such as *trouser-leg*,
*trouser-press* and *trouser-bottoms*.[4]

[Jeans](Jeans "wikilink") are trousers typically made from
[denim](denim "wikilink") or [dungaree](Dungaree_(fabric) "wikilink")
cloth. [Skin-tight](Skin-tight_clothing "wikilink") leggings are
commonly referred to as *[tights](tights "wikilink")*.

### Types

There are several different main types of pants and trousers, such as
[dress pants](dress_pants "wikilink"), [jeans](jeans "wikilink"),
[khakis](khakis "wikilink"), [chinos](chinos "wikilink"),
[leggings](leggings "wikilink"), and
[sweatpants](sweatpants "wikilink"). They can also be classified by fit,
fabric, and other features. There is apparently no universal,
overarching classification.

## History

![](Bronze_Statuette_of_a_Suebi_captive.jpg "Bronze_Statuette_of_a_Suebi_captive.jpg")

### Prehistory

There is some evidence, from [figurative
art](figurative_art "wikilink"), of trousers being worn in the [Upper
Paleolithic](Upper_Paleolithic "wikilink"), as seen on the figurines
found at the Siberian sites of [Mal'ta and
Buret'](Mal'ta-Buret'_culture "wikilink").[5] The oldest known trousers
were found at the Yanghai cemetery, extracted from mummies in
[Turpan](Turpan "wikilink"), [Xinjiang](Xinjiang "wikilink"), western
China, belonging to the [Eastern Iranian
people](Eastern_Iranian_people "wikilink") of the [Tarim
Basin](Tarim_Basin "wikilink"); dated to the period between the 13th and
the 10th century BC and made of wool, the trousers had straight legs and
wide crotches, and were likely made for horseback riding.[6][7]

### Antiquity

![](Scythian_Kul_Oba_Crimea.jpg "Scythian_Kul_Oba_Crimea.jpg")

Trousers enter [recorded history](recorded_history "wikilink") in the
6th century BC, on the rock carvings and artworks of
[Persepolis](Persepolis "wikilink"),[8] and with the appearance of
horse-riding [Eurasian nomads](Eurasian_nomads "wikilink") in [Greek
ethnography](Greek_ethnography "wikilink"). At this time, [Iranian
peoples](Iranian_peoples "wikilink") such as
[Scythians](Scythians "wikilink"), [Sarmatians](Sarmatians "wikilink"),
[Sogdians](Sogdians "wikilink") and [Bactrians](Bactrians "wikilink")
among others, along with [Armenians](Armenians "wikilink") and
[Eastern](East_Asian "wikilink") and [Central
Asian](Central_Asian "wikilink") peoples such as the
[Xiongnu](Xiongnu "wikilink") and [Hunnu](Hunnu "wikilink"), are known
to have worn trousers.[9][10] Trousers are believed to have been worn by
both sexes among these early users.[11]

The [ancient Greeks](ancient_Greeks "wikilink") used the term
"ἀναξυρίδες" (*anaxyrides*) for the trousers worn by
[Eastern](Eastern_world "wikilink") nations[12] and "σαράβαρα"
(*sarabara*) for the loose trousers worn by the Scythians.[13] However,
they did not wear trousers since they thought them ridiculous,[14][15]
using the word "θύλακοι" (*thulakoi*), pl. of "θύλακος" (*thulakos*),
"sack", as a slang term for the loose trousers of
[Persians](Persians "wikilink") and other [Middle
Easterners](Middle_East "wikilink").[16]

Republican [Rome](Rome "wikilink") viewed the [draped
clothing](Himation "wikilink") of [Greek](Ancient_Greece "wikilink") and
[Minoan](Minoan_civilization "wikilink") ([Cretan](Crete "wikilink"))
culture as an emblem of civilisation and disdained trousers as the mark
of barbarians.[17] As the Roman Empire expanded beyond the
[Mediterranean](Mediterranean "wikilink") basin, however, the greater
warmth provided by trousers led to their adoption.[18] Two types of
trousers eventually saw widespread use in Rome: the
*[Feminalia](Feminalia "wikilink")*, which fit snugly and usually fell
to knee or mid-calf length,[19] and the *[Braccae](Braccae "wikilink")*,
a loose-fitting trouser that was closed at the ankles.[20] Both garments
were adopted originally from the [Celts](Celts "wikilink") of Europe,
although later familiarity with the Persian [Near
East](Near_East "wikilink") and the [Teutons](Teutons "wikilink")
increased acceptance. Feminalia and Braccae both began use as military
garments, spreading to civilian dress later, and were eventually made in
a variety of materials including leather, wool, cotton and silk.[21]
![](Parthian_Mithraeum_at_Dura_Europos_240_dC.jpg "fig:Parthian_Mithraeum_at_Dura_Europos_240_dC.jpg")

### Medieval Europe

Trousers of various designs were worn throughout the Middle Ages in
Europe, especially by men. Loose-fitting trousers were worn in
[Byzantium](Byzantium "wikilink") under long
[tunics](tunics "wikilink"),[22] and were worn by many tribes, such as
the Germanic tribes that migrated to the Western Roman Empire in [Late
Antiquity](Late_Antiquity "wikilink") and the [Early Middle
Ages](Early_Middle_Ages "wikilink"), as evidenced by both artistic
sources and such relics as the 4th-century costumes recovered from the
[Thorsberg](Thorsberg "wikilink") [peat bog](peat_bog "wikilink") (see
illustration).[23] Trousers in this period, generally called *brais*,
varied in length and were often closed at the cuff or even had attached
foot coverings, although open-legged pants were also seen.[24]
![](Detail_of_historiated_'KL'_letters_of_a_man_with_a_thresher,_Psalter_(the_'Shaftesbury_Psalter')_with_calendar_and_prayers,_England.jpg "fig:Detail_of_historiated_'KL'_letters_of_a_man_with_a_thresher,_Psalter_(the_'Shaftesbury_Psalter')_with_calendar_and_prayers,_England.jpg")
By the 8th century there is evidence of the wearing in Europe of two
layers of trousers, especially among upper-class males.[25] The under
layer is today referred to by costume historians as "drawers", although
that usage did not emerge until the late 16th century. Over the drawers
were worn trousers of wool or linen, which in the 10th century began to
be referred to as breeches in many places. Tightness of fit and length
of leg varied by period, class, and geography. (Open legged trousers can
be seen on the [Norman](Normans "wikilink") soldiers of the [Bayeux
Tapestry](Bayeux_Tapestry "wikilink").)[26]

Although [Charlemagne](Charlemagne "wikilink") (742–814) is recorded to
have habitually worn trousers, donning the Byzantine tunic only for
ceremonial occasions,[27][28] the influence of the Roman past and the
example of Byzantium led to the increasing use of long tunics by men,
hiding most of the trousers from view and eventually rendering them an
undergarment for many. As undergarments, these trousers became briefer
or longer as the length of the various medieval outer garments changed,
and were met by, and usually attached to, another garment variously
called [hose](Hose_(clothing) "wikilink") or
[stockings](stockings "wikilink").

In the 14th century it became common among the men of the noble and
knightly classes to connect the hose directly to their
[pourpoints](pourpoint "wikilink")[29] (the padded under jacket worn
with armoured breastplates that would later evolve into the
[doublet](doublet_(clothing) "wikilink")) rather than to their drawers.
In the 15th century, rising hemlines led to ever briefer drawers[30]
until they were dispensed with altogether by the most fashionable elites
who joined their skin-tight hose back into trousers.[31] These trousers,
which we would today call tights but which were still called hose or
sometimes joined hose at the time, emerged late in the 15th century and
were conspicuous by their open crotch which was covered by an
independently fastening front panel, the
[codpiece](codpiece "wikilink"). The exposure of the hose to the waist
was consistent with 15th-century trends, which also brought the
pourpoint/doublet and the [shirt](shirt "wikilink"), previously
undergarments, into view,[32] but the most revealing of these fashions
were only ever adopted at court and not by the general population.

Men's clothes in Hungary in the 15th century consisted of a shirt and
trousers as underwear, and a [dolman](dolman "wikilink") worn over them,
as well as a short fur-lined or sheepskin coat. Hungarians generally
wore simple trousers, only their colour being unusual; the dolman
covered the greater part of the trousers.[33]

### Europe before the 1900s

Around the turn of the 16th century it became conventional to separate
hose into two pieces, one from the waist to the crotch which fastened
around the top of the legs, called trunk hose, and the other running
beneath it to the foot. The trunk hose soon reached down the thigh to
fasten below the knee and were now usually called
"[breeches](breeches "wikilink")" to distinguish them from the lower-leg
coverings still called *hose* or, sometimes *stockings*. By the end of
the 16th century, the codpiece had also been incorporated into breeches
which featured a *fly* or *fall front* opening.

As a modernisation measure, Tsar [Peter the
Great](Peter_the_Great "wikilink") of Russia issued a decree in 1701
commanding every Russian man, other than clergy and peasant farmers, to
wear trousers.[34]

During the [French Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink") of 1789 and
following, male citizens of France adopted a working-class costume
including ankle-length trousers, or pantaloons (named from a [Commedia
dell'Arte](Commedia_dell'Arte "wikilink") character named
*[Pantalone](Pantalone "wikilink")*)[35] in place of the aristocratic
knee-breeches (*[culottes](culottes "wikilink")*). (Compare
*[sans-culottes](sans-culottes "wikilink")*.) The new garment of the
revolutionaries differed from that of the *ancien regime* upper classes
in three ways:

-   it was loose where the style for breeches had most recently been
    form-fitting
-   it was ankle length where breeches had generally been knee-length
    for more than two centuries
-   they were open at the bottom while breeches were fastened

Pantaloons became fashionable in early 19th-century England and the
[Regency era](Regency_era "wikilink"). The style was introduced by [Beau
Brummell](Beau_Brummell "wikilink") (1778–1840)[36][37][38] and by
mid-century had supplanted breeches as fashionable street-wear.[39] At
this point, even knee-length pants adopted the open bottoms of trousers
(see [shorts](shorts "wikilink")) and were worn by young boys, for
sports, and in tropical climates. Breeches proper survived into the 20th
century as [court dress](court_dress "wikilink"), and also in baggy
mid-[calf](Calf_(leg) "wikilink") (or three-quarter length) versions
known as [plus-fours](plus-fours "wikilink") or
[knickers](Knickerbockers_(clothing) "wikilink") worn for active sports
and by young schoolboys. Types of breeches are still worn today by
[baseball](baseball "wikilink") and [American
football](American_football "wikilink") players, and by equestrians.

Sailors may have played a role in the worldwide dissemination of
trousers as a fashion. In the 17th and 18th centuries, sailors wore
baggy trousers known as *[galligaskins](galligaskins "wikilink")*.
Sailors also pioneered the wearing of [jeans](jeans "wikilink") -
trousers made of [denim](denim "wikilink"). These became more popular in
the late 19th century in the [American West](American_West "wikilink")
because of their ruggedness and durability.

Starting around the mid-19th century, [Wigan](Wigan "wikilink") pit-brow
girls scandalised [Victorian society](Victorian_era "wikilink") by
wearing trousers for their work at the local [coal
mines](coal_mine "wikilink"). They wore skirts over their trousers and
rolled them up to their waists to keep them out of the way. Although
[pit-brow lasses](pit_brow_women "wikilink") worked above ground at the
pit-head, their task of sorting and shovelling coal involved hard manual
labour, so wearing the usual long skirts of the time would have greatly
hindered their movements.

### Medieval Korea

The Korean word for trousers, *[baji](baji_(clothing) "wikilink")*
(originally *pajibaji*) first appears in recorded history around the
turn of the 15th century, but pants may have been in use by Korean
society for some time. From at least this time pants were worn by both
sexes in Korea. Men wore trousers either as outer garments or beneath
skirts, while it was unusual for adult women to wear their pants (termed
*[sokgot](sokgot "wikilink")*) without a covering skirt. As in Europe, a
wide variety of styles came to define regions, time periods and age and
gender groups, from the unlined *gouei* to the padded *sombaji*.[40]

### Women wearing trousers

See also the "Laws" section below in this article.

![](Amazon_trousers_BM_VaseB673.jpg "fig:Amazon_trousers_BM_VaseB673.jpg")
wearing trousers and carrying a shield with an attached patterned cloth
and a quiver. [Ancient Greek](Ancient_Greece "wikilink") Attic
white-ground [alabastron](alabastron "wikilink"), c. 470 BC, [British
Museum](British_Museum "wikilink"), London\]\]

In Western society, it was Eastern culture that inspired French designer
[Paul Poiret](Paul_Poiret "wikilink") (1879–1944) to be one of the first
to design pants for women. In 1913, Poiret created loose-fitting,
wide-leg trousers for women called harem pants, which were based on the
costumes of the popular ballet *Sheherazade*. Written by Nikolai
[Rimsky-Korsakov](Rimsky-Korsakov "wikilink") in 1888, Sheherazade was
based on a collection of legends from the Middle East called 1001
Arabian Nights.[41]

In the early 20th century women air pilots and other working women often
wore trousers. Frequent photographs from the 1930s of actresses [Marlene
Dietrich](Marlene_Dietrich "wikilink") and [Katharine
Hepburn](Katharine_Hepburn "wikilink") in trousers helped make trousers
acceptable for women. During [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"),
women employed in factories or doing other "men's work" on war service
wore trousers when the job demanded it. In the post-war era, trousers
became acceptable casual wear for gardening, the beach, and other
leisure pursuits. In Britain during World War II the rationing of
clothing prompted women to wear their husbands' civilian clothes,
including trousers, to work while the husbands men were serving in the
armed forces. This was partly because they were seen as practical for
work, but also so that women could keep their clothing allowance for
other uses. As this practice of wearing trousers became more widespread
and as the men's clothing wore out, replacements were needed. By the
summer of 1944, it was reported that sales of women's trousers were five
times more than the previous year.[42]

In 1919, [Luisa Capetillo](Luisa_Capetillo "wikilink") challenged
mainstream society by becoming the first woman in Puerto Rico to wear
trousers in public. Capetillo was sent to jail for what was considered
to be a crime, but the charges were later dropped.

In the 1960s, [André Courrèges](André_Courrèges "wikilink") introduced
long trousers for women as a fashion item, leading to the era of the
[pantsuit](pantsuit "wikilink") and [designer
jeans](designer_jeans "wikilink") and the gradual erosion of social
prohibitions against girls and women wearing trousers in schools, the
workplace and in fine restaurants.

In 1969, Rep. [Charlotte Reid](Charlotte_Reid "wikilink") (R-Ill.)
became the first woman to wear trousers in the [US
Congress](US_Congress "wikilink").[43]

[Pat Nixon](Pat_Nixon "wikilink") was the first American [First
Lady](First_Lady "wikilink") to wear trousers in public.[44]

In 1989, California state senator [Rebecca
Morgan](Rebecca_Morgan "wikilink") became the first woman to wear
trousers in a US state senate.[45]

[Hillary Clinton](Hillary_Clinton "wikilink") was the first woman to
wear trousers in an official American First Lady portrait.[46]

In [Rome](Rome "wikilink") in 1992, a woman's jeans became a central
issue in a rape case. A 45-year-old driving instructor was accused of
rape. When he picked up an 18-year-old girl for her first driving
lesson, he allegedly raped her for an hour, then threatened to kill her
if she reported the crime. Later that night she told her parents, who
sought to press charges. While the alleged rapist was convicted and
sentenced, the [Italian Supreme
Court](Court_of_Cassation_(Italy) "wikilink") overturned the conviction
in 1998 because the victim wore tight jeans. It was argued that she must
have necessarily have had to help her attacker remove her jeans, thus
making the act [consensual](consensual "wikilink") ("because the victim
wore very, very tight jeans, she had to help him remove them...and by
removing the jeans...it was no longer rape but consensual sex"). The
Italian Supreme Court stated in its decision “it is a fact of common
experience that it is nearly impossible to slip off tight jeans even
partly without the active collaboration of the person who is wearing
them.”[47] This ruling sparked widespread feminist protest. The day
after the decision, women in the Italian Parliament protested by wearing
jeans and holding placards that read “Jeans: An Alibi for Rape.” As a
sign of support, the California Senate and Assembly followed suit. Soon
Patricia Giggans, Executive Director of the Los Angeles Commission on
Assaults Against Women, (now Peace Over Violence) made [Denim
Day](Denim_Day "wikilink") an annual event. As of 2011 at least 20 U.S.
states officially recognize Denim Day in April. As of 2008 the [Italian
Supreme Court](Court_of_Cassation_(Italy) "wikilink") has overturned
their findings, and there is no longer a "denim" defense to the charge
of rape.

Women were not allowed to wear trousers on the US Senate floor until
1993.[48][49] In 1993, Senators [Barbara
Mikulski](Barbara_Mikulski "wikilink") and [Carol Moseley
Braun](Carol_Moseley_Braun "wikilink") wore trousers onto the floor in
defiance of the rule, and female support staff followed soon after, with
the rule being amended later that year by Senate Sergeant-at-Arms
[Martha Pope](Martha_Pope "wikilink") to allow women to wear trousers on
the floor so long as they also wore a jacket.[50][51]

In [Malawi](Malawi "wikilink") women were not legally allowed to wear
trousers under President [Kamuzu Banda](Kamuzu_Banda "wikilink")'s rule
until 1994.[52] This law was introduced in 1965.[53]

Since 2004 the [International Skating
Union](International_Skating_Union "wikilink") has allowed women to wear
trousers instead of skirts in ice skating competition.[54]

In 2009, journalist [Lubna Hussein](Lubna_Hussein "wikilink") was fined
the equivalent of $200 when a court found her guilty of violating
Sudan's decency laws by wearing trousers.[55]

In 2012 the [Royal Canadian Mounted
Police](Royal_Canadian_Mounted_Police "wikilink") began to allow women
to wear trousers and boots with all their formal uniforms.[56]

In 2012 and 2013, some [Mormon](Mormon "wikilink") women participated in
"Wear Pants to Church Day", in which they wore trousers to church
instead of the customary dresses to encourage gender equality within
[The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints](The_Church_of_Jesus_Christ_of_Latter-day_Saints "wikilink").[57][58]
Over one thousand women participated in 2012.[59]

In 2013, Turkey's parliament ended a ban on women lawmakers wearing
trousers in its assembly.[60]

Also in 2013, an old bylaw requiring women in Paris, France to ask
permission from city authorities before "dressing as men", including
wearing trousers (with exceptions for those "holding a bicycle handlebar
or the reins of a horse") was declared officially revoked by France's
Women's Rights Minister, [Najat
Vallaud-Belkacem](Najat_Vallaud-Belkacem "wikilink").[61] The bylaw was
originally intended to prevent women from wearing the pantalons
fashionable with Parisian rebels in the [French
Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink").[62]

In 2014, an Indian family court in [Mumbai](Mumbai "wikilink") ruled
that a husband objecting to his wife wearing a [kurta](kurta "wikilink")
and [jeans](jeans "wikilink") and forcing her to wear a
[sari](sari "wikilink") amounts to cruelty inflicted by the husband and
can be a ground to seek divorce.[63] The wife was thus granted a divorce
on the ground of cruelty as defined under section 27(1)(d) of Special
Marriage Act, 1954.[64]

Until 2016 some female crew members on [British
Airways](British_Airways "wikilink") were required to wear British
Airways’ standard "ambassador" uniform, which has not traditionally
included trousers.[65]

In 2017, [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints](The_Church_of_Jesus_Christ_of_Latter-day_Saints "wikilink")
announced that its female employees could wear "professional pantsuits
and dress slacks" while at work; dresses and skirts had previously been
required.[66] In 2018 it was announced that female missionaries of that
church could wear dress slacks except when attending the temple and
during Sunday worship services, baptismal services, and mission
leadership and zone conferences.[67]

In 2019, [Virgin Atlantic](Virgin_Atlantic "wikilink") began to allow
its female flight attendants to wear pants.[68]

## Parts of trousers

![](Trouser-parts.svg "Trouser-parts.svg")

### Pleats

[Pleats](Pleats "wikilink") just below the waistband on the front typify
many styles of formal and casual trousers, including
[suit](Suit_(clothing) "wikilink") trousers and
[khakis](khakis "wikilink"). There may be one, two, three, or no pleats,
which may face either direction. When the pleats open towards the
pockets they are called reverse pleats (typical of most trousers today)
and when they open toward the fly they are known as forward pleats.

### Cuffs

Trouser-makers can finish the legs by [hemming](hem "wikilink") the
bottom to prevent fraying. Trousers with [turn-ups](turn-ups "wikilink")
(cuffs in American English), after hemming, are rolled outward and
sometimes pressed or stitched into place.

### Fly

A fly is a covering over an opening join concealing the mechanism, such
as a [zipper](zipper "wikilink"), [velcro](velcro "wikilink") or
buttons, used to join the opening. In trousers, this is most commonly an
opening covering the [groin](groin "wikilink"), which makes the pants
easier to put on or take off. The opening also allows men to
[urinate](urination "wikilink") without lowering their trousers.

Trousers have varied historically in whether or not they have a fly.
Originally, [hose](Hose_(clothing) "wikilink") did not cover the area
between the legs. This was instead covered by a doublet or by a
[codpiece](codpiece "wikilink"). When breeches were worn, during the
Regency period for example, they were fall-fronted (or broad fall).
Later, after trousers (pantaloons) were invented, the fly-front (split
fall) emerged.[69] The panelled front returned as a sporting option,
such as in riding breeches, but is now hardly ever used, a fly being by
far the most common fastening. Most flies now use a zipper, though
button-fly pants continue to be available.

### Trouser support

At present, most trousers are held up through the assistance of a
[belt](Belt_(clothing) "wikilink") which is passed through the **belt
loops** on the waistband of the trousers. However, this was
traditionally a style acceptable only for casual trousers and work
trousers; suit trousers and formal trousers were suspended by the use of
[braces](Suspenders "wikilink") (*suspenders* in American English)
attached to buttons located on the interior or exterior of the
waistband. Today, this remains the preferred method of trouser support
amongst adherents of classical British tailoring. Many men claim this
method is more effective and more comfortable because it requires no
cinching of the waist or periodic adjustment.

## Society

In modern Western society, males customarily wear trousers and not
skirts or dresses. There are exceptions, however, such as the ceremonial
Scottish [kilt](kilt "wikilink") and Greek
[fustanella](fustanella "wikilink"), as well as robes or robe-like
clothing such as the [cassocks](cassock "wikilink") of clergy and the
academic robes, both rarely worn today in daily use. (See also [Men's
skirts](Men's_skirts "wikilink").)![](Convertible_Ventilated_Trousers_shown_with_one_leg_cover_removed.jpg "fig:Convertible_Ventilated_Trousers_shown_with_one_leg_cover_removed.jpg")

Based on [Deuteronomy](Book_of_Deuteronomy "wikilink") 22:5 in the
[Bible](Bible "wikilink") ("The woman shall not wear that which
pertaineth unto a man"), some groups, including the Amish, Hutterites,
some Mennonites, some Baptists, a few Church of Christ groups, and most
Orthodox Jews, believe that women [should not
wear](dress_code "wikilink") trousers. These groups permit women to wear
[underpants](underpants "wikilink") as long as they are hidden. By
contrast, many Muslim sects approve of pants as they are considered more
modest than any skirt that is shorter than ankle length. However, some
mosques require ankle length trousers for both Muslims and non-Muslims
on the premises.[70]

Among certain groups, low-rise, baggy trousers exposing
[underwear](underwear "wikilink") became
[fashionable](fashion "wikilink"); for example, among
[skaters](Skateboarding "wikilink") and in 1990s [hip hop
fashion](hip_hop_fashion "wikilink"). This fashion is called
[sagging](Sagging_(fashion) "wikilink") or, alternatively, "busting
slack."[71]

*Cut-offs* are homemade [shorts](shorts "wikilink") made by cutting the
legs off trousers, usually after holes have been worn in fabric around
the knees. This extends the useful life of the trousers. The remaining
leg fabric may be hemmed or left to fray after being cut.

## Laws

### France

In 2013, a law requiring women in Paris, France to ask permission from
city authorities before "dressing as men", including wearing trousers
(with exceptions for those "holding a bicycle handlebar or the reins of
a horse") was declared officially revoked by France's Women's Rights
Minister, [Najat
Vallaud-Belkacem](Najat_Vallaud-Belkacem "wikilink").[72] The bylaw was
originally intended to prevent women from wearing the pantalons
fashionable with Parisian rebels in the [French
Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink").[73]

### India

In 2014, an Indian family court in [Mumbai](Mumbai "wikilink") ruled
that a husband objecting to his wife wearing a [kurta](kurta "wikilink")
and [jeans](jeans "wikilink") and forcing her to wear a
[sari](sari "wikilink") amounts to cruelty inflicted by the husband and
can be a ground to seek divorce.[74] The wife was thus granted a divorce
on the ground of cruelty as defined under section 27(1)(d) of Special
Marriage Act, 1954.[75]

### Italy

In [Rome](Rome "wikilink") in 1992, a 45-year-old driving instructor was
accused of rape. When he picked up an 18-year-old girl for her first
driving lesson, he allegedly raped her for an hour, then told her that
if she was to tell anyone he would kill her. Later that night she told
her parents and her parents agreed to help her press charges. While the
alleged rapist was convicted and sentenced, the [Italian Supreme
Court](Court_of_Cassation_(Italy) "wikilink") overturned the conviction
in 1998 because the victim wore tight jeans. It was argued that she must
have necessarily have had to help her attacker remove her jeans, thus
making the act [consensual](consensual "wikilink") ("because the victim
wore very, very tight jeans, she had to help him remove them...and by
removing the jeans...it was no longer rape but consensual sex"). The
Italian Supreme Court stated in its decision “it is a fact of common
experience that it is nearly impossible to slip off tight jeans even
partly without the active collaboration of the person who is wearing
them.”[76] This ruling sparked widespread feminist protest. The day
after the decision, women in the Italian Parliament protested by wearing
jeans and holding placards that read “Jeans: An Alibi for Rape.” As a
sign of support, the California Senate and Assembly followed suit. Soon
Patricia Giggans, Executive Director of the Los Angeles Commission on
Assaults Against Women, (now Peace Over Violence) made [Denim
Day](Denim_Day "wikilink") an annual event. As of 2011 at least 20 U.S.
states officially recognize Denim Day in April. Wearing jeans on this
day, 22 April, has become an international symbol of protest. As of 2008
the [Italian Supreme Court](Court_of_Cassation_(Italy) "wikilink") has
overturned their findings, and there is no longer a "denim" defense to
the charge of rape.

### Malawi

In Malawi women were not legally allowed to wear trousers under
President [Kamuzu Banda](Kamuzu_Banda "wikilink")'s rule until 1994.[77]
This law was introduced in 1965.[78]

### Puerto Rico

In 1919, [Luisa Capetillo](Luisa_Capetillo "wikilink") challenged
mainstream society by becoming the first woman in Puerto Rico to wear
trousers in public. Capetillo was sent to jail for what was then
considered to be a crime, but, the judge later dropped the charges
against her.

### Turkey

In 2013, Turkey's parliament ended a ban on women lawmakers wearing
trousers in its assembly.[79]

### Sudan

In Sudan, Article 152 of the Memorandum to the 1991 Penal Code prohibits
the wearing of "obscene outfits" in public. This law has been used to
arrest and prosecute women wearing trousers. Thirteen women including
journalist [Lubna al-Hussein](Lubna_al-Hussein "wikilink") were arrested
in Khartoum in July 2009 for wearing trousers; ten of the women pleaded
guilty and were flogged with ten lashes and fined 250 Sudanese pounds
apiece. Lubna al-Hussein considers herself a good Muslim and asserts
"Islam does not say whether a woman can wear trousers or not. I'm not
afraid of being flogged. It doesn't hurt. But it is insulting." She was
eventually found guilty and fined the equivalent of $200 rather than
being flogged.[80]

### United States

In May 2004, in [Louisiana](Louisiana "wikilink"),
[Democrat](Democratic_Party_(United_States) "wikilink") and state
legislator [Derrick Shepherd](Derrick_Shepherd "wikilink") proposed a
bill that would make it a crime to appear [in
public](in_public "wikilink") [wearing trousers below the
waist](Sagging_(fashion) "wikilink") and thereby exposing one's skin or
"intimate clothing".[81] The Louisiana bill did not pass.

In February 2005, [Virginia](Virginia "wikilink") legislators tried to
pass a similar law that would have made punishable by a $50 fine "any
person who, while in a public place, intentionally wears and displays
his below-waist undergarments, intended to cover a person's intimate
parts, in a lewd or indecent manner". (It is not clear whether, with the
same coverage by the trousers, exposing underwear was considered worse
than exposing bare skin, or whether the latter was already covered by
another law.) The law passed in the [Virginia House of
Delegates](Virginia_House_of_Delegates "wikilink"). However, various
criticisms to it arose. For example, newspaper columnists and radio
[talk show](talk_show "wikilink") hosts consistently said that since
most people that would be penalised under the law would be young
[African-American](African-American "wikilink") men, the law would thus
be a form of [racial
discrimination](Discrimination#Race_discrimination "wikilink").
Virginia's state senators voted against passing the law.[82][83]

In [California](California "wikilink"), Government Code Section 12947.5
(part of the [California Fair Employment and Housing
Act](California_Fair_Employment_and_Housing_Act "wikilink") (FEHA))
expressly protects the right to wear pants.[84] Thus, the standard
California FEHA discrimination complaint form includes an option for
"denied the right to wear pants."[85]

## See also

-   [Capri pants](Capri_pants "wikilink")
-   [Churidar](Churidar "wikilink")
-   [Clothing sizes](Clothing_sizes "wikilink")
-   [No Pants Day](No_Pants_Day "wikilink")
-   [Open-crotch pants](Open-crotch_pants "wikilink")
-   [Oxford bags](Oxford_bags "wikilink")
-   [Pantalettes](Pantalettes "wikilink")
-   [Low-rise pants](Low-rise_pants "wikilink")
-   [Pantsuit](Pantsuit "wikilink")
-   [Thai fisherman pants](Thai_fisherman_pants "wikilink")
-   [Trouser clips](Trouser_clips "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-

-   **(video)** [Etymology of 'Pants'](http://vimeo.com/40556736), from
    [Mysteries of Vernacular](http://www.mysteriesofvernacular.com/)

[Trousers_and_shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] Pictures show Achaemenid costumes including trousers.
<http://persianwondersvideo.blogspot.com.au/>

[9] Payne, Blanche. *History of Costume*. Harper & Row, 1965. pp. 49–51

[10]

[11] Lever, James (1995, 2010). *Costume and Fashion: A Concise
History*. Thames and Hudson. p. 15.

[12] [ἀναξυρίδες](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.04.0057%3Aentry%3Da%29nacuri%2Fdes),
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, *A Greek-English Lexicon*, on
Perseus Digital Library

[13] [σαράβαρα](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.04.0057%3Aentry%3Dsara%2Fbara),
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, *A Greek-English Lexicon*, on
Perseus Digital Library

[14] Euripides, *Cyclops*, 182

[15] Aristophanes, *Wasps*, 1087

[16] [θύλακος](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.04.0057%3Aentry%3Dqu%2Flakos),
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, *A Greek-English Lexicon*, on
Perseus Digital Library

[17] Lever, James. *Costume and Fashion: A Concise History*. Thames and
Hudson, 1995, 2010. p. 50.

[18] Payne, Blanche (1965). *History of Costume*. Harper & Row. p. 97

[19] ["Feminalia."](http://www.fashionencyclopedia.com/fashion_costume_culture/The-Ancient-World-Rome/Feminalia.html),
*The Fashion Encyclopedia*. Retrieved 10 October 2010.

[20]

[21] Lever, James (1995, 2010). *Costume and Fashion: A Concise
History*. Thames and Hudson. p. 40.

[22] Payne, Blanche. *History of Costume*. Harper & Row, 1965. p. 124

[23] Payne, Blanche. *History of Costume*. Harper & Row, 1965. Pp.
136–138

[24] Lever, James. *Costume and Fashion: A Concise History*. Thames and
Hudson, 1995, 2010. p. 51.

[25] Payne, Blanche. *History of Costume*. Harper & Row, 1965. p. 142

[26] Payne, Blanche. *History of Costume*. Harper & Row, 1965. pp. 142,
154

[27] Einhard. *The Life of Charlemagne*. University of Michigan Press,
1960.

[28] Lever, James. *Costume and Fashion: A Concise History*. Thames and
Hudson, 1995, 2010. pp. 50–51.

[29] Payne, Blanche. *History of Costume*. Harper & Row, 1965. p. 180

[30] Lever, James. *Costume and Fashion: A Concise History*. Thames and
Hudson, 1995, 2010. p. 58.

[31] Payne, Blanche. *History of Costume*. Harper & Row, 1965. p. 207

[32] Payne, Blanche. *History of Costume*. Harper & Row, 1965. p. 200

[33]

[34]

[35] *Italian Culture in the Drama of Shakespeare and His
Contemporaries*, ed. Michele Marrapodi 2007

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40] Lee, Kyung Ja, and Hong Na Young and Chang Sook Hwan, translated by
Shin Jooyoung. Traditional Korean Costume. Global Orient, 2003. p. 231.

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52] Sarah DeCapua, [*Malawi in
Pictures*](https://books.google.com/books?id=ZQuk3icokBQC&pg=PA7&lpg=PA7&dq=Malawian+women+wearing+pants&source=bl&ots=rBFZgDz7p8&sig=jQe_Bx9Tetqv-h0LK0WozfetGeU&hl=en&ei=-2I4TfelLYbVgAem8r26CA&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=10&ved=0CGEQ6AEwCQ#v=onepage&q=Malawian%20women%20wearing%20pants&f=false),
2009, pg 7.

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67] <https://www.wsbradio.com/news/national/female-mormon-missionaries-given-option-wear-dress-slacks/3JvcGA9xS8XaSPLDJZAaJI/>

[68]

[69] Croonborg, Frederick: *The Blue Book of Men's Tailoring*. Croonborg
Sartorial Co. New York and Chicago, 1907. p. 123

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]