![](Anita_Krohn_Traaseth,_Adm.dir_Hewlett_Packard_Norge_(8539823418).jpg "fig:Anita_Krohn_Traaseth,_Adm.dir_Hewlett_Packard_Norge_(8539823418).jpg")
in trousers, Norway, 2013\]\]

![](Amazon_trousers_BM_VaseB673.jpg "fig:Amazon_trousers_BM_VaseB673.jpg")
wearing trousers and carrying a shield with an attached patterned cloth
and a quiver. [Ancient Greek](Ancient_Greece "wikilink") Attic
white-ground [alabastron](alabastron "wikilink"), ca. 470 BCE, [British
Museum](British_Museum "wikilink"), London.\]\]

**[Trousers](Trousers "wikilink")** ([British
English](British_English "wikilink")) or **pants** ([American
English](American_English "wikilink")) first appear in recorded history
among nomadic steppe-people in Western Europe. Archaeological evidence
suggests that men and women alike wore pants in that cultural
context.[1] However, for much of modern history, the use of trousers has
been restricted to men. In many regions, this norm was enforced not only
by social custom but also by law. There are, however, many historical
cases of women wearing trousers in defiance of these norms, for a
variety of reasons, including comfort, freedom of movement, fashion,
disguise (notably for runaway
[slaves](Slavery_in_the_United_States "wikilink")[2]), attempts to evade
the [gender pay gap](gender_pay_gap "wikilink"), and attempts to
establish an empowered public identity for women.[3] Especially in the
20th and 21st centuries, the customs and laws restricting this manner of
dress have relaxed dramatically, reflecting a growing acceptance and
normalization of the practice.

Various US cities, in the 19th and 20th centuries, passed legislation
barring women from wearing trousers. Representative among these was an
1863 law passed by San Francisco's Board of Supervisors criminalizing
appearing in public in "a dress not belonging to his or her sex",
although similar laws existed in [Columbus,
Ohio](Columbus,_Ohio "wikilink") (passed 1848); [Chicago,
Illinois](Chicago,_Illinois "wikilink") (passed 1851); [Houston,
Texas](Houston,_Texas "wikilink") (passed 1864); [Orlando,
Florida](Orlando,_Florida "wikilink") (passed 1907), and approximately
two dozen other US cities.[4]
(Anti-[crossdressing](Cross-dressing "wikilink") laws continued to pass
well into the 20th century, with [Detroit,
Michigan](Detroit,_Michigan "wikilink"), and [Miami,
Florida](Miami,_Florida "wikilink"), passing laws as late as the 1950s,
and [Cincinnati, Ohio](Cincinnati,_Ohio "wikilink"), passing one in
1974.[5])

Additionally, existing laws such as anti-vagrancy statutes were pressed
into service to ensure that women would dress in accord with the gender
norms of the time. One such instance would be New York's anti-vagrancy
statute of 1845, which stated that "Every person who, having his face
painted, discolored, covered or concealed, or being otherwise disguised,
in a manner calculated to prevent him from being identified, shall
appear in any road or public highway, or in any field, lot, wood or
inclosure, may be pursued and arrested”[6]. This law was used to
prosecute women for cross-dressing, on the grounds that their dressing
outside of gender norms constituted a "disguise".[7] Boston used similar
anti-vagrancy laws to arrest [Emma Snodgrass](Emma_Snodgrass "wikilink")
and [Harriet French](Harriet_French "wikilink") in 1852. (Snodgrass
would be arrested again in Cleveland in 1853, and French would be
arrested again in New York in 1856.) French reportedly broke with
convention in order to pursue job opportunities open only to men: she
claimed to the *New York Daily Times* that she could "get more wages"
dressed as a man.[8]

Anti-vagrancy laws were also used to arrest [Jennie
Westbrook](Jennie_Westbrook "wikilink") in New York, in 1882 and 1883.
Westbook's case was said at the time to have "awakened deep interest"
among the public, as it was understood that she was attempting to
"escape from that bondage \[to\] which social laws have subjected the
sex". Like Harriet French in Boston, West identified work opportunities
as her reason for cross-dressing: "Her excuse was that she could make
$20 a week in her disguise, while as a 'saleslady' in a fashionable
store the pay would be only one-third that amount."[9]

## Early dress reform

![](Mary_edwards_walker.jpg "Mary_edwards_walker.jpg")

In 1851, early women's rights advocate [Elizabeth Smith
Miller](Elizabeth_Smith_Miller "wikilink") introduced [Amelia
Bloomer](Amelia_Bloomer "wikilink") to a garment initially known as the
"Turkish dress", which featured a knee-length skirt over Turkish-style
pantaloons[10] Bloomer came to advocate and promote the dress, including
instructions for making it, in *[The
Lily](The_Lily_(newspaper) "wikilink")*, a newspaper dedicated to the
"Emancipation of Woman from Intemperance, Injustice, Prejudice, and
Bigotry". This inspired a craze for the dress, which came to be known as
[bloomers](Bloomers_(clothing) "wikilink").[11]

[Elizabeth Cady Stanton](Elizabeth_Cady_Stanton "wikilink"), [Susan B.
Anthony](Susan_B._Anthony "wikilink"), and [Lucy
Stone](Lucy_Stone "wikilink"), other early advocates for women's rights,
also adopted this style of dress in the 1850s, referring to it as the
"freedom dress" .

Concurrently, some female laborers, notably the [pit brow
women](pit_brow_women "wikilink") working at coal pits in the Wigan
area, began wearing trousers beneath a short skirt as a practical
component of their uniform. This attracted the attention of the public,
and various photographers produced records of the women's unconventional
manner of dress through the mid- to late 19th century.

Another woman who advocated publicly for dress reform was [Mary Edwards
Walker](Mary_Edwards_Walker "wikilink"), the
[abolitionist](Abolitionism_in_the_United_States "wikilink") and Civil
War surgeon. Walker, who had worn
[bloomers](Bloomers_(clothing) "wikilink") while working at a military
hospital, wrote in 1871 that women's dress should "protect the person,
and allow freedom of motion and circulation, and not make the wearer a
slave to it".[12] Walker openly wore men's trousers, and was arrested
several times for wearing male attire (her earliest arrest was 1866, in
New York, and her final arrest was in 1913, in Chicago, at the age of
80[13]).

## Changing norms

### 20th century

#### United States and Europe

##### 1900s–1920s

![](MDafoeMay1924Crop.jpg "MDafoeMay1924Crop.jpg")

An updated version of the bloomer, for athletic use, was introduced in
the 1890s as women's bicycling came into fashion. As activities such as
tennis, cycling, and horseback riding became more popular at the turn of
the century, women turned to pants or
[knickerbockers](knickerbockers_(clothing) "wikilink") to provide
comfort and freedom of movement in these activities, and some laws made
allowances for women's wearing of pants during these activities.[14]
Women increasingly wore trousers as leisurewear in the 1920s and 30s,
and working women, including female pilots, often wore trousers.

Arrests for cross-dressing did not necessarily cease during this time.
For instance, in 1919, labor leader [Luisa
Capetillo](Luisa_Capetillo "wikilink") became the first woman in [Puerto
Rico](Puerto_Rico "wikilink") to wear trousers in public. Capetillo was
sent to jail for what was then considered to be a crime in Puerto Rico,
although the judge later dropped the charges against her.

##### 1930s

Actresses [Marlene Dietrich](Marlene_Dietrich "wikilink") and [Katharine
Hepburn](Katharine_Hepburn "wikilink") were often photographed in
trousers in the 1930s; Dietrich famously appearing in a black
[tuxedo](tuxedo "wikilink") and matching fedora at the 1932 premiere of
*[The Sign of the
Cross](The_Sign_of_the_Cross_(1932_film) "wikilink")*[15].

[Eleanor Roosevelt](Eleanor_Roosevelt "wikilink") became the first
[First Lady](First_Lady "wikilink") to appear in pants at a formal
function, presiding over the [Easter Egg
Roll](Easter_Egg_Roll "wikilink") in 1933 wearing riding pants, a
consequence of not having time to change after an early morning ride.
However, she seemed to embrace the unconventional circumstance, posing
for a photo in the pants on the [South
Portico](South_Portico "wikilink") of the White House.[16]

*[Vogue](Vogue_(magazine) "wikilink")* featured its first spread of
women wearing slacks in 1939.[17]

##### 1940s and 1950s

During [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), women working in
industrial work in war service wore their husbands' trousers, and in the
post-war era trousers were still common casual wear for gardening,
socialising, and other leisure pursuits.

Similarly, in [Britain](United_Kingdom "wikilink") during the [Second
World War](Second_World_War "wikilink"), because of the rationing of
clothing, many women took to wearing their husbands' civilian clothes to
work while their husbands were away in the armed forces. This was partly
because they were seen as work garments, and partly to allow women to
keep their clothing allowance for other uses. As the men's clothes wore
out, replacements were needed, so that by the summer of 1944 it was
reported that sales of women's trousers were five times more than in the
previous year.[18]

In 1959, the Government Code Section 12947.5 (part of the [California
Fair Employment and Housing
Act](California_Fair_Employment_and_Housing_Act "wikilink"), passed in
[California](California "wikilink")) expressly protected the right to
wear pants ([American English](American_English "wikilink") for
trousers).[19] Thus, the standard FEHA discrimination complaint form now
includes an option for "denied the right to wear pants".[20]

##### 1960s and 1970s

![](Yves_St_Laurent_le_smoking_at_deYoung_Museum_San_Francisco.jpg "Yves_St_Laurent_le_smoking_at_deYoung_Museum_San_Francisco.jpg")

In the 1960s, [André Courrèges](André_Courrèges "wikilink") introduced
jeans for women, leading to the era of [designer
jeans](designer_clothing "wikilink"). And in 1966, [Yves Saint
Laurent](Yves_Saint_Laurent_(designer) "wikilink") introduced *Le
Smoking*, a woman's tuxedo intended for formal occasions,[21] famously
photographed by [Helmut Newton](Helmut_Newton "wikilink") in a manner
emphasizing the wearer's [androgyny](androgyny "wikilink") and
suggesting [lesbian](lesbian "wikilink") overtones.

In 1969 Rep. [Charlotte Reid](Charlotte_Reid "wikilink") (R-Ill.) became
the first woman to wear trousers in the U.S. Congress.[22]

Also in 1969, [Barbra Streisand](Barbra_Streisand "wikilink") became the
first woman to attend the Oscars in pants, accepting an award for her
role in *[Funny Girl](Funny_Girl_(film) "wikilink")* dressed in an
outfit designed by [Arnold Scaasi](Arnold_Scaasi "wikilink").[23]

In 1972, [Pat Nixon](Pat_Nixon "wikilink") was the first American [First
Lady](First_Lady "wikilink") to model pants in a national magazine.[24]
However, [First Ladies](First_Lady "wikilink") had been seen earlier
wearing pants, including [Lou Hoover](Lou_Hoover "wikilink")
(photographed privately wearing riding pants at the presidential retreat
[Camp Rapidan](Camp_Rapidan "wikilink")) and [Jackie
Kennedy](Jackie_Kennedy "wikilink") (photographed wearing pants and a
sweater on Cape Cod in 1960 and wearing [palazzo
pants](palazzo_pants "wikilink") in Italy in 1962).[25]

In 1972, the [Education Amendments of
1972](Education_Amendments_of_1972 "wikilink") passed in the United
States, which, as part of the [Title IX](Title_IX "wikilink")
non-discrimination provisions, declared that dresses could not be
required of girls. Dress codes thus changed in public schools across the
United States.

In the 1970s, trousers became quite fashionable for women. [Jane
Fonda](Jane_Fonda "wikilink"), [Diana Ross](Diana_Ross "wikilink"),
[Katharine Hepburn](Katharine_Hepburn "wikilink"), [Tatum
O'Neal](Tatum_O'Neal "wikilink"), and [Diane
Keaton](Diane_Keaton "wikilink") all helped to popularize the wearing of
pants, appearing at high-profile awards ceremonies dressed in suits or
pants ensembles; Tatum O'Neal notably accepted an Oscar at age 10 while
wearing a tuxedo.[26]

##### 1980s and 1990s

In 1989 California state senator [Rebecca
Morgan](Rebecca_Morgan "wikilink") became the first woman to wear
trousers in a U.S. state senate.[27]

[Hillary Clinton](Hillary_Clinton "wikilink") was the first woman to
wear trousers in an official U.S. First Lady portrait.[28]

Women were not allowed to wear trousers on the U.S. Senate floor until
1993.[29][30] In 1993, Senators [Barbara
Mikulski](Barbara_Mikulski "wikilink") and [Carol Moseley
Braun](Carol_Moseley_Braun "wikilink") wore trousers onto the floor in
defiance of the rule, and female support staff followed soon after, with
the rule being amended later that year by Senate Sergeant-at-Arms
[Martha Pope](Martha_Pope "wikilink") to allow women to wear trousers on
the floor so long as they also wore a jacket.[31][32]

#### Africa

In 1994, [Malawi](Malawi "wikilink") women became legally allowed to
wear trousers under President [Kamuzu Banda](Kamuzu_Banda "wikilink")'s
rule[33], originally prohibited by a law introduced in 1965.[34]

### 21st century

#### International norms

Since 2004 the [International Skating
Union](International_Skating_Union "wikilink") has allowed women to wear
trousers instead of skirts in competition if they wish.[35]

In 2013, a bylaw requiring women in Paris, France to ask permission from
city authorities before "dressing as men", including wearing trousers
(with exceptions for those "holding a bicycle handlebar or the reins of
a horse") was declared officially revoked by France's Women's Rights
Minister, [Najat
Vallaud-Belkacem](Najat_Vallaud-Belkacem "wikilink").[36] The bylaw was
originally intended to prevent women from wearing the pantalons
fashionable with Parisian rebels in the [French
Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink").[37]

Also in 2013, Turkey's parliament ended a ban on women lawmakers wearing
trousers in its assembly.[38]

In 2014, an Indian family court in [Mumbai](Mumbai "wikilink") ruled
that a husband objecting to his wife wearing a [kurta](kurta "wikilink")
and [jeans](jeans "wikilink") and forcing her to wear a
[sari](sari "wikilink") amounts to cruelty inflicted by the husband and
can be a grounds for divorce.[39] The wife was thus granted a divorce on
the ground of cruelty as defined under section 27(1)(d) of Special
Marriage Act, 1954.[40]

#### Workplace norms

In 2012 the [Royal Canadian Mounted
Police](Royal_Canadian_Mounted_Police "wikilink") began to allow women
to wear trousers and boots with all their formal uniforms.[41]

Until 2016 some female crew members on [British
Airways](British_Airways "wikilink") were required to wear British
Airways' standard "ambassador" uniform, which has not traditionally
included trousers.[42]

In 2017, [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints](The_Church_of_Jesus_Christ_of_Latter-day_Saints "wikilink")
announced that its female employees could wear "professional pantsuits
and dress slacks" while at work; dresses and skirts had previously been
required.[43] In 2018 that same church declared that their female
missionaries could wear dress slacks if they wanted, except when
attending the temple and during Sunday worship services, baptismal
services, and mission leadership and zone conferences.[44]

In 2019, [Virgin Atlantic](Virgin_Atlantic "wikilink") began to allow
its female [flight attendants](flight_attendants "wikilink") to wear
pants.[45]

#### School norms

Most UK schools allow female pupils to wear trousers, but many girls
still wear skirts in primary and secondary schools, even where the
choice of trousers is given. In the late 20th and early 21st century,
many schools began changing their uniform rules to allow trousers for
girls amidst opposition to skirts-only policies - the most publicised
possibly being Jo Hale vs Whickam Comprehensive in 2000.[46] Although
commonly accepted that girls may wear trousers to school, no test case
is known to have been brought before the courts, making the legal
position uncertain on requiring skirts as part of girls' uniforms. The
rule is still enforced in many schools, particularly independent and
selective state schools. In fact, government guidelines expressly state
the decision of allowing girls to wear trousers is with individual
schools.[47]

## Remaining prohibitions

### Religious prohibitions

There are a number of [religions](religion "wikilink") that prohibit
women from revealing their legs, requiring all women and often young
girls not to wear trousers but a long dress. By contrast, a sizable
majority of [Sikhs](Sikhs "wikilink") often believe wearing trousers is
preferred for Sikh women to maintain modesty.

Although many contemporary [Mennonites](Mennonites "wikilink") have no
dress code, among traditional, [conservative
Mennonites](conservative_Mennonites "wikilink"), sometimes referred to
as "Old Order Mennonites", long skirts or dresses covering most of the
legs are required. They also wear dresses and skirts because they
believe men and women should be distinguished from one another.
"Deuteronomy 22:5 The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a
man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so
are abomination unto the Lord thy God." (KJV) Conservative conferences
usually demand that women wear a specific style of dress. This is
usually in the style of the cape dress, with a double covering or
"cape". Most non-conservative conferences allow for the wearing of
trousers by women.

[Pentecostal](Pentecostal "wikilink") women typically wear skirts
because of the Biblical commandment in the Old Testament that women must
not wear men's clothing; this is mandatory in some [Oneness
Pentecostal](Oneness_Pentecostalism "wikilink") churches (at the
individual pastor's discretion).

Many [Independent Fundamental
Baptist](Independent_Fundamental_Baptist "wikilink") churches, colleges
and universities prohibit females from wearing trousers. For example, at
[Pensacola Christian College](Pensacola_Christian_College "wikilink"),
female students may only wear trousers or shorts for "recreational
purposes" only. They are also required to wear skirts or dresses until
5:00 PM on workdays.[48]

In Orthodox Jewish belief, the space between a woman's legs is
considered to be a private area, and therefore, must be covered by a
garment. However, in other cultures wearing men's clothing is forbidden
biblically under the prohibition of *Lo Silbash* ("A woman shall not
wear that which pertaineth unto a man", ). In some [Jewish
communities](Jewish_ethnicities "wikilink"), such as the Jews from Arab
countries and [Modern Orthodox](Modern_Orthodox "wikilink") communities,
it is reasoned that trousers provide an extra form of modesty.

On 13 November 866, [Pope Nicholas I](Pope_Nicholas_I "wikilink") wrote
to King [Boris I of Bulgaria](Boris_I_of_Bulgaria "wikilink"): "Whether
you or your women wear or do not wear trousers neither impedes your
salvation nor leads to any increase of your virtue"[49] (*sive vos, sive
feminae vestrae, sive deponatis, sive induatis femoralia, nec saluti
officit, nec ad virtutum vestrarum proficit incrementum* - [Patrologia
Latina](Patrologia_Latina "wikilink"), CXIX, 1002).[50] Some members of
the [Society of Saint Pius X](Society_of_Saint_Pius_X "wikilink") have
spoken of the preference of women's wearing skirts rather than
trousers.[51] Cardinal Siri's letter has also been cited as
justification for women wearing skirts and dresses.[52] In addition,
Saint [Thomas Aquinas](Thomas_Aquinas "wikilink"), the Church's
principal theologian, also taught that "outward apparel should be
consistent with the estate of the person, according to the general
custom. Hence it is in itself sinful for a woman to wear man's clothes,
or vice versa; and it is expressly forbidden in the Law (Deuteronomy
22)..."[53]

In 2012 and 2013, some [Mormon](Mormon "wikilink") women participated in
"Wear Pants to Church Day", in which they wore trousers to church
instead of the customary dresses to encourage gender equality within
[The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints](The_Church_of_Jesus_Christ_of_Latter-day_Saints "wikilink") (LDS
Church).[54][55] Over one thousand women participated in this in
2012.[56] In 2017, the LDS Church announced that its female employees
could wear "professional pantsuits and dress slacks" while at work;
dresses and skirts had previously been required.[57] In 2018 the LDS
Church declared that their female missionaries could wear dress slacks
if they wanted, except when attending the temple and during Sunday
worship services, baptismal services, and mission leadership and zone
conferences.[58]

### Dancing

Many forms of dancing require females to wear skirts or dresses, either
by convention or competition rules. In [Scottish highland
dancing](Scottish_highland_dancing "wikilink") for example, women don't
wear [trews](trews "wikilink"), but instead either wear a skirt or dress
including the [Aboyne dress](Aboyne_dress "wikilink") (for the national
dances) or the kilt-based outfit for the Highland dances. However,
tartan trews can be worn by women in the [United
States](United_States "wikilink").

### Sudan

In [Sudan](Sudan "wikilink"), Article 152 of the Memorandum to the 1991
Penal Code prohibits the wearing of "obscene outfits" in public. This
law has been used to arrest and prosecute women wearing trousers.
Thirteen women including journalist [Lubna
al-Hussein](Lubna_al-Hussein "wikilink") were arrested in Khartoum in
July 2009 for wearing trousers; ten of the women pleaded guilty and were
flogged with ten lashes and fined 250 Sudanese pounds apiece. Lubna
al-Hussein considers herself a good Muslim and asserts "Islam does not
say whether a woman can wear trousers or not. I'm not afraid of being
flogged. It doesn't hurt. But it is insulting." She was eventually found
guilty and fined the equivalent of $200 rather than being flogged.[59]

## Trousers and sexual violence

In [Rome](Rome "wikilink") in 1992, a 45-year-old driving instructor was
accused of rape. When he picked up an 18-year-old girl for her first
driving lesson, he allegedly raped her for an hour, then told her that
if she was to tell anyone he would kill her. Later that night she told
her parents and her parents agreed to help her press charges. While the
alleged rapist was convicted and sentenced, the [Italian Supreme
Court](Court_of_Cassation_(Italy) "wikilink") overturned the conviction
in 1998 because the victim wore tight jeans. It was argued that she must
have necessarily have had to help her attacker remove her jeans, thus
making the act [consensual](consensual "wikilink") ("because the victim
wore very, very tight jeans, she had to help him remove them...and by
removing the jeans...it was no longer rape but consensual sex"). The
Italian Supreme Court stated in its decision "it is a fact of common
experience that it is nearly impossible to slip off tight jeans even
partly without the active collaboration of the person who is wearing
them."[60] This ruling sparked widespread feminist protest. The day
after the decision, women in the Italian Parliament protested by wearing
jeans and holding placards that read "Jeans: An Alibi for Rape." As a
sign of support, the California Senate and Assembly followed suit. Soon
Patricia Giggans, Executive Director of the Los Angeles Commission on
Assaults Against Women, (now Peace Over Violence) made [Denim
Day](Denim_Day "wikilink") an annual event. As of 2011 at least 20 U.S.
states officially recognize Denim Day in April. Wearing jeans on this
day has become an international symbol of protest against erroneous and
destructive attitudes about sexual assault. As of 2008 the [Italian
Supreme Court](Court_of_Cassation_(Italy) "wikilink") has overturned
their findings, and there is no longer a "denim" defense to the charge
of rape.

## See also

-   [Bloomers (clothing)](Bloomers_(clothing) "wikilink")
-   [Victorian dress reform](Victorian_dress_reform "wikilink")
-   [Men's skirts](Men's_skirts "wikilink")
-   [Pantsuit](Pantsuit "wikilink")

## References

[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Clothing
controversies](Category:Clothing_controversies "wikilink")
[Category:Feminism](Category:Feminism "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Trousers](Category:Women's_rights_in_religious_movements "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18] L.W.N. Smith. [Clothes Rationing in World War
2](http://www.worldwar2exraf.co.uk/Online%20Museum/Museum%20Docs/clothing3.html)

[19] [California Government Code Section
12947.5](http://codes.lp.findlaw.com/cacode/GOV/1/2/d3/2.8/6/1/s12947.5).

[20] [Instructions to Obtain Right to Sue Notice by
Mail](http://www.dfeh.ca.gov/res/docs/RTS/RTS%20Instructions%20and%20Form%20(2-13).pdf)
, California Department of Fair Housing and Employment, February 2013.

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33] Sarah DeCapua, [*Malawi in
Pictures*](https://books.google.com/books?id=ZQuk3icokBQC&pg=PA7&lpg=PA7&dq=Malawian+women+wearing+pants&source=bl&ots=rBFZgDz7p8&sig=jQe_Bx9Tetqv-h0LK0WozfetGeU&hl=en&ei=-2I4TfelLYbVgAem8r26CA&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=10&ved=0CGEQ6AEwCQ#v=onepage&q=Malawian%20women%20wearing%20pants&f=false),
2009, pg 7.

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49] [The Responses of Pope Nicholas I to the Questions of the Bulgars
A.D. 866 (Letter
99)](http://www.pravoslavieto.com/history/09/866_responce_pope_Nicholas_I.htm#gen52),
translated by W. L. North (1998) from the edition of Ernest Perels, in
MGH Epistolae VI, Berlin, 1925, pp.568-600.

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]