![](Zubazbang2008.jpg "fig:Zubazbang2008.jpg").\]\]
![](ZUBAZ_10.jpg "fig:ZUBAZ_10.jpg") and [San Diego
Chargers](San_Diego_Chargers "wikilink") game on November 6,
2011.\]\]**Zubaz** ([1] is a brand of shorts and pants that became
popular during the early 1990s.

## History and description

In 1988, Bob Truax and Dan Stock began brainstorming a new kind of
shorts for the heavy-lifting man.[2] The pair developed a comfortably
baggy pair of shorts with an elastic waistband. Zubaz was registered as
a trademark in 1989. Initially, they were marketed as a comfortable,
functional pair of shorts for
[weightlifting](Powerlifting "wikilink").[3] [Michael
Hegstrand](Road_Warrior_Hawk "wikilink"), [Joseph
Laurinaitis](Road_Warrior_Animal "wikilink") and manager Nick Derella
used their professional wrestling personae as [The Road
Warriors](The_Road_Warriors "wikilink") to help popularize the pants in
the late 1980s and early 1990s.[4]

They hoped to make a pair of shorts that would stretch and expand with
the body during a workout. In a short time, the shorts became wildly
popular in the [United States](United_States "wikilink"). The Zubaz
company sold $100 million worth of products in 1991 alone. The company
slogan was "Dare to be Different."

Although Zubaz began as a line of shorts, the brand was extended into
long pants, caps, shirts, and even diapers. The pants are tapered at the
ankle, with the outer part of the leg being longer than the inner part.
They have an [elastic](Elastomer "wikilink") waistband to allow for
greater [flexibility](flexibility_(anatomy) "wikilink") and movement.
The pants were originally created in a zebra print, but later began to
be sold in almost any design imaginable.

Regardless of the specific design, Zubaz are almost always bright,
flashy, and often ostentatious. Zubaz designed the uniforms of several
[Arena Football League](Arena_Football_League_(1987–2008) "wikilink")
teams in the early 1990s, including the [Tampa Bay
Storm](Tampa_Bay_Storm "wikilink") and the now-defunct [New Orleans
Night](New_Orleans_Night "wikilink"). However, these designs were
considered outlandish and were soon replaced.

In a 1993 survey in *[Inside Sports](Inside_Sports "wikilink")*
magazine, Zubaz finished third in the voting for "Worst Thing to Happen
in Sports" that year. Ahead of it were the retirement of [Michael
Jordan](Michael_Jordan "wikilink") and the death of wrestler [Dino
Bravo](Dino_Bravo "wikilink").

The long pants were the most popular item in the product line. Despite
the decline in popularity, fans still sometimes wear Zubaz pants in team
colors at professional [football](American_football "wikilink") games.

Zubaz manufactured "slider shorts." These shorts had the famous wild
patterns at the bottom of the garment while the rest of the garment
displayed the name and logo of the sport team and the Zubaz name.

The original business went bankrupt in 1996[5] and Truax and Stock
bought back the trademark rights. In 2007, Zubaz resurfaced, offering a
limited production release of the original classic Zubaz patterns. In
2014 the brand fully resurfaced with a wider selection on its internet
storefront.[6] The revived brand opened its first storefront in [Fashion
Outlets of Niagara Falls](Fashion_Outlets_of_Niagara_Falls "wikilink"),
a mall in [Niagara Falls, New York](Niagara_Falls,_New_York "wikilink"),
in November 2016; Zubaz chose [Western New
York](Western_New_York "wikilink") as its first brick-and-mortar
location because of the brand's particular association with the [Buffalo
Bills](Buffalo_Bills "wikilink"), as fans of the franchise have
consistently been one of the brand's most loyal customer bases.[7]

In another sign of the resurrection of the Zubaz brand, on July 16, 2008
the [Saint Paul Saints](Saint_Paul_Saints "wikilink") [independent
professional
baseball](American_Association_of_Independent_Professional_Baseball "wikilink")
team wore Zubaz pants during their game against the [Sioux City
Explorers](Sioux_City_Explorers "wikilink"). The bases were also painted
in a recognizable Zubaz tiger-striped pattern. On the December 6 edition
of professional wrestling TV show, *[TNA
Impact](TNA_Impact "wikilink")*, [Christopher
Daniels](Christopher_Daniels "wikilink") and
[Kazarian](Frankie_Kazarian "wikilink") wrestled the main event in pink
and black Zubaz pants. Lately, the Russian Curling team wore Zubaz pants
in the 2014 Winter Olympics. The [Detroit
Tigers](Detroit_Tigers "wikilink") also recently wore the Zubaz
pants.[8]

## References

## External links

-

[Category:1980s fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1990s fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Sports clothing](Category:Sports_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Trousers and shorts](Category:Trousers_and_shorts "wikilink")
[Category:Companies based in
Minnesota](Category:Companies_based_in_Minnesota "wikilink")
[Category:Sportswear brands](Category:Sportswear_brands "wikilink")
[Category:Martial arts
culture](Category:Martial_arts_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Professional
wrestling](Category:Professional_wrestling "wikilink")

[1] [About Us: The Pant, The Myth, The
Legend...](http://www.zubaz.com/About.aspx) Zubaz.com

[2] [A Brief History of
Zubaz](http://mentalfloss.com/article/27813/brief-history-zubaz) Mental
Floss. Trex, Ethan. 2011.

[3]

[4]

[5] [Zubaz pants are
back](http://www.startribune.com/local/east/16943196.html), Herón
Márquez Estrada, *Minneapolis Star Tribune*, March 24, 2008.

[6]

[7]

[8]