The **air bag vest** is a personal [safety
device](safety_device "wikilink") worn by some
[motorcyclists](motorcyclist "wikilink") that has found greatest use
among [equestrian](Equestrianism "wikilink") competitors. The device is
worn over a standard padded vest and is automatically inflated by gas
released from a carbon dioxide canister when a tether attached to the
horse's saddle is extended during a fall.[1]

## Description and availability

The device weighs approximately two pounds and is worn over a standard
protective high density foam vest. Connected by a cord to the horse's
saddle, a carbon dioxide canister is punctured when the cord is extended
during a fall, inflating the vest in 100 to 250 milliseconds. Unlike car
air bags, the air bag vests can be repacked and reloaded for reuse with
a new CO<sub>2</sub> cartridge. Companies that manufacture the vests
created them for motorcyclists as early as 1999. Point Two Air Jackets,
a British manufacturer, began selling the device for horse riders
starting in 2009 and the Japanese company Hit Air has a similar device,
which sell for about $400 to $700 depending on the model.[2] In the US,
companies such as MotoAir-USA started to spring up, using similar
technology. As of 2010, Point Two estimated that 6,000 eventing riders
wore its vests, while Hit Air estimated that 10,000 of its vests were
being used. The United States Team at the [FEI World Equestrian
Games](FEI_World_Equestrian_Games "wikilink") in 2010 planned to provide
riders with air bag vests.[3]

## Effectiveness

Studies conducted by the British [Transport Research
Laboratory](Transport_Research_Laboratory "wikilink") showed that the
vests improved protection by 69% when worn by riders in conjunction with
a standard protective vest and cut the risk of rib fractures and damage
to internal organs by 20%. Studies performed by the TRL for Point Two
showed a reduction exceeding 55% in the chest compression experienced
while wearing the vest compared to unprotected falls, and that chest
compression was cut in half of the maximum limit set by the U.S.
[National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration](National_Highway_Traffic_Safety_Administration "wikilink")
for chest compression in automobile crashes.[4] At a competition in
France held in September 2009, rider Karim Florent Laghouag was able to
walk away from a fall in which his horse somersaulted over a fence with
his only injury a dislocated elbow. Similar types of rotational falls
had resulted in the death of 13 riders in the four-year span through
2010.[5] In 2010, British rider [Oliver
Townend](Oliver_Townend "wikilink") described the vest as "the biggest
step forward in the safety of our sport, ever". Townend had his horse
fall on top of him while participating in the [Rolex Kentucky Three
Day](Rolex_Kentucky_Three_Day "wikilink") in [Lexington,
Kentucky](Lexington,_Kentucky "wikilink"), and despite a broken sternum
and four cracked ribs, credited the vest with allowing him to leave the
hospital after only one day, saying that without the vest he "would be
in a box or in America for a month".[6]

## Certification

Following a detailed research project funded by the Injured Jockeys Fund
and conducted by independent test house SATRA [7] in conjunction with
the British Racehorse Authority a standard was established for the use
of air bag vests by jockeys, and an amended version covering the use of
air bag vests for riders across all other equestrian disciplines.

-   SATRA M38: February 2013 â€“ Requirements for air-vests, for use in
    horse riding, intended to give protection in the event of a fall to
    ground
-   SATRA M39: February 2013 - Requirements for jockeys' body protectors
    additionally incorporating airbag technology.

The SATRA Standards cover ergonomics, total area covered by the air bag,
impact attenuation, activation force, lanyard strength, lanyard length,
inflation speed and pressures and have been adopted by most of the major
air jacket manufacturers.

In 2013 a specific certification was created for use of air bag vests by
motorcyclists to improve the standard of mechanically operated airbag
vests. The standard is EN1621/4:2013[8] this standard relates to all
mechanically operated airbags (i.e. lanyard systems) and not electronic
systems (like those used in MotoGP). The standard dictates inflation
speed, inflation duration, inflation volume and amount of force it
absorbs.

Italian motorcycle racer [Valentino Rossi](Valentino_Rossi "wikilink")
and other leading competitors have worn a version of the vest, but the
technology is still under development given the higher speeds. Versions
of the device are also being developed for [all-terrain
vehicle](all-terrain_vehicle "wikilink") and [mountain
bike](mountain_bike "wikilink") riders.[9]

## References

[Category:Protective gear](Category:Protective_gear "wikilink")
[Category:Airbags](Category:Airbags "wikilink")
[Category:Vests](Category:Vests "wikilink")

[1] Thomas, Katie. ["Added Safety in the
Saddle"](https://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/24/sports/24airbag.html), *[The
New York Times](The_New_York_Times "wikilink")*, August 23, 2010.
Accessed August 25, 2010.

[2]

[3]

[4] ["TRL initial observations of the Point Two Children's Air
Jacket"](http://www.point-two.co.uk/equine/news.php) , Point Two.
Accessed August 24, 2010.

[5]

[6]

[7] <http://www.satra.com>

[8] <http://shop.bsigroup.com/ProductDetail/?pid=000000000030216637>

[9]