![](Tanktop2.jpg "fig:Tanktop2.jpg")
![](Rick_Santorum_by_Gage_Skidmore_3.jpg "fig:Rick_Santorum_by_Gage_Skidmore_3.jpg")[1]
wearing a sweater vest\]\] A **sweater vest** (known as a *tank top* or
*sleeveless sweater* in the UK) is an item of
[knitwear](knitted_fabric "wikilink") that is similar to a
[sweater](sweater "wikilink"), but without [sleeves](sleeve "wikilink"),
usually with a low-cut neckline. They were popular in the 20th century,
particularly in the 1970s in the UK, and are again growing in popularity
in this century.[2]

## Styles

![](Jamesregan.jpg "fig:Jamesregan.jpg") sweater vest typically worn by
[cricketers](cricket_(sport) "wikilink")\]\] One of the most common
patterns on a sweater vest is [argyle](argyle_(pattern) "wikilink").
Many newer designs feature a return to popular patterns from eras past.
Other variations include designs of a more modern nature, including
stripes. Some of the most common of [neckline](neckline "wikilink")
shapes are the V-neck[3] and the [crew neck](crew_neck "wikilink"),
which is similar to a common [T-shirt](T-shirt "wikilink") neckline.

## As athletic wear

A sweater vest, white flannel pants and collared shirt are standard wear
for professional [cricketers](cricket "wikilink") in the UK, Australia,
India, and South Africa. The [cable knit](cable_knit "wikilink") vests
often have a contrasting red, blue or green stripe around the neckline.
Before shorts and [polo shirts](polo_shirt "wikilink") were introduced
in the 1930s, [tennis](tennis "wikilink") players wore a similar outfit.

In the early 20th century, [golfers](golf "wikilink") often wore an
argyle pattern tank top with their [brogues](brogue_shoe "wikilink"),
[flat caps](flat_cap "wikilink") and [plus
fours](plus_fours "wikilink"). This was a more comfortable and practical
alternative to the [tweed cloth](tweed_cloth "wikilink") [Norfolk
jacket](Norfolk_jacket "wikilink") previously worn for outdoor pursuits.

## Fashion

Sweater vests are popular among sports fans, particularly those who play
[golf](golf "wikilink").[4] Those with sports team logos, especially
[NFL](NFL "wikilink") and [college](College_athletics "wikilink") teams,
are also popular and are frequently worn by American football coaches,
most notably [Jim Tressel](Jim_Tressel "wikilink"), who has been given
the nickname "The Sweater Vest" by fans[5] despite the garment's origins
at rival Michigan.[6]

## References

[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Sweaters](Category:Sweaters "wikilink")
[Category:Vests](Category:Vests "wikilink") [Category:1970s
fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1980s
fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]