![](Waistcoat.jpg "fig:Waistcoat.jpg") A **waistcoat** ( or ;
colloquially called a [weskit](wikt:weskit#English "wikilink"), derived
from the [French](French_language "wikilink") *veste*[1]), or **vest**,
is a sleeveless upper-body [garment](garment "wikilink"). It is usually
worn over a [dress shirt](dress_shirt "wikilink") and
[necktie](necktie "wikilink") and below a
[coat](Coat_(clothing) "wikilink") as a part of most men's [formal
wear](formal_wear "wikilink"). It is also sported as the third piece in
the traditional three-piece male [lounge
suit](lounge_suit "wikilink").[2] Any given vest can be simple or ornate
or for leisure or luxury.[3] Historically, the vest can be worn either
in the place of or underneath a larger coat dependent upon the weather,
wearer, and setting.[4]

## Name

The term **waistcoat** is used in the [United
Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink") and many [Commonwealth
countries](Commonwealth_countries "wikilink").[5] The term **vest** is
used widely in the [United States](United_States "wikilink") and
[Canada](Canada "wikilink"), and is often worn as part of formal attire
or as the third piece of a [lounge suit](lounge_suit "wikilink") in
addition to a jacket and trousers.[6] The term vest derives from the
[French language](French_language "wikilink") *veste* “jacket, sport
coat", the term for a vest-waistcoat in French today being "gilet", the
[Italian language](Italian_language "wikilink") *veste* "robe, gown",
and the [Latin language](Latin_language "wikilink") *vestis*.[7] The
term vest in European countries refers to the
[A-shirt](A-shirt "wikilink"), a type of athletic vest. The
[Banyan](Banyan_(clothing) "wikilink"), a garment of India, is commonly
called a vest in Indian English.[8]

## Characteristics and use

![](Young_Somali_man_2.jpg "fig:Young_Somali_man_2.jpg") A waistcoat has
a full vertical opening in the front, which fastens with
[buttons](buttons "wikilink") or snaps. Both
[single-breasted](single-breasted "wikilink") and
[double-breasted](double-breasted "wikilink") waistcoats exist,
regardless of the formality of dress, but single-breasted ones are more
common. In a three piece suit, the cloth used matches the jacket and
trousers. Waistcoats can also have lapels or revers depending on the
style.

Before [wristwatches](wristwatch "wikilink") became popular, gentlemen
kept their [pocket watches](pocket_watch "wikilink") in the front
waistcoat pocket, with the watch on a [watch
chain](watch_chain "wikilink") threaded through a buttonhole. Sometimes
an extra hole was made in line with the buttonholes for this use. A bar
on the end of the chain held it in place to catch the chain if it were
dropped or pulled. Waistcoats are now worn less, so the pocket watch may
more likely be stored in a trouser pocket.

Wearing a belt with a waistcoat, and indeed any suit, is not
traditional. To give a more comfortable hang to the trousers, the
waistcoat instead covers a pair of
[braces](braces_(clothing) "wikilink") (suspenders in the U.S.)
underneath it.

A custom still sometimes practised is to leave the bottom button undone.
This is said to have been started by [King Edward
VII](King_Edward_VII "wikilink") (then the Prince of Wales), whose
expanding waistline required it.[9] Variations on this include that he
forgot to fasten the lower button when dressing and this was copied. It
has also been suggested that the practice originated to prevent the
waistcoat riding up when on horseback. Undoing the bottom button avoids
stress to the bottom button when sitting down; when it is fastened, the
bottom of the waistcoat pulls sideways causing wrinkling and bulging,
since modern waistcoats are cut lower than old ones. This convention
only applies to single-breasted day waistcoats and not double breasted,
evening, straight-hem or livery waistcoats that are all fully buttoned.

### Daywear

![](Girl_in_denim_waistcoat_2008.JPG "fig:Girl_in_denim_waistcoat_2008.JPG")
waistcoat.\]\] Waistcoats worn with [lounge
suits](lounge_suit "wikilink") (now principally single-breasted)
normally match the suit in cloth, and have four to six buttons. Double
breasted waistcoats are rare compared to single. As
[formalwear](formalwear "wikilink"), it used to be common to wear a
contrastingly coloured waistcoat, such as in
[buff](buff_(colour) "wikilink") or dove linen. This is still seen in
[morning dress](morning_dress "wikilink"), which requires a waistcoat.

### Eveningwear

The waistcoats worn with [white-](white_tie "wikilink") and
[black-](black_tie "wikilink") tie are different from standard daytime
single-breasted waistcoats, being much lower in cut (with three buttons
or four buttons, where all are fastened). The much larger expanse of
shirt compared to a daytime waistcoat allows more variety of form, with
"U" or "V" shapes possible, and there is large choice of outlines for
the tips, ranging from pointed to flat or rounded. The colour normally
matches the tie, so only black barathea wool, grosgrain or satin and
white marcella, grosgrain or satin are worn, although white waistcoats
used to be worn with black tie in early forms of the dress.

[Waiters](Waiting_staff "wikilink"), sometimes also waitresses, and
other people working at white-tie events, to distinguish themselves from
guests, sometimes wear gray tie, which consists of the dress coat of
white tie (a squarely cut away tailcoat) with the black waistcoat and
tie of black tie.

### Clergy

The variant of the clergy [cassock](cassock "wikilink") may be cut as a
vest. It differs in style from other waistcoats in that the garment
buttons to the neck and has an opening that displays the [clerical
collar](clerical_collar "wikilink").

In the [Church of England](Church_of_England "wikilink"), a particular
[High Church](High_Church "wikilink") clerical vest introduced in the
1830s was nicknamed the "M.B. Waistcoat" with "M.B." standing for the
[Mark of the Beast](Mark_of_the_Beast "wikilink").[10]
![](BlackManinVestonCellPhone.jpg "fig:BlackManinVestonCellPhone.jpg")

### Scouting

In the [Girl Scouts of the USA](Girl_Scouts_of_the_USA "wikilink"),
vests are used as an alternative to the sash for the display of badges.

### Stock trading

In many [stock exchanges](stock_exchange "wikilink"), traders who engage
in [open outcry](open_outcry "wikilink") may wear colored sleeveless
waistcoats, or [trading jackets](trading_jacket "wikilink"), with
insignia on the back.

### Sport

Waistcoats, alongside [bowties](bowtie "wikilink"), are commonly worn by
[billiard](billiards "wikilink") players during a tournament. It is
usually worn in [snooker](snooker "wikilink") and
[blackball](Blackball_(pool) "wikilink") tournaments in the [United
Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink").

## History

![](Waistcoat_MET_C.I.66.14.2_S2.jpg "fig:Waistcoat_MET_C.I.66.14.2_S2.jpg"),
1747.\]\] The predecessors to the waistcoat are the [Middle
Age](Middle_Age "wikilink")-era [doublet
(clothing)](doublet_(clothing) "wikilink") and
[gambeson](gambeson "wikilink").[11]

Various types of waistcoats may have been worn in theatrical manners
such as performances and masquerades prior to what is said to be the
early origins of the vest.[12] During the 17th century, the forerunner
to the [three-piece suit](Suit_(clothing) "wikilink") was appropriated
from the [traditional dress](traditional_dress "wikilink") of diverse
Eastern European and Islamic countries. The
[justacorps](justacorps "wikilink") [frock coat](frock_coat "wikilink")
was copied from the long [zupans](Zupan_(clothing) "wikilink") worn in
Poland and the Ukraine,[13] the [necktie](necktie "wikilink") or
[cravat](cravat "wikilink") was derived from a scarf worn by Croatian
mercenaries fighting for King [Louis XIII of
France](Louis_XIII_of_France "wikilink"),[14] and the brightly coloured
silk waistcoats popularised by King [Charles II of
England](Charles_II_of_England "wikilink") were inspired by exotic
Persian attire acquired by wealthy English travellers.[15]

On October 7 of the year 1666, [King Charles II of
England](King_Charles_II_of_England "wikilink") revealed that he would
be launching a new type of fashion piece in men's wear.[16] Scholar
Diana De Marly suggests that the formation of such a mode of dress acted
as a response to French fashion being so dominant in the time
period.[17] The item King Charles II was referencing on that day was a
long piece donned beneath the coat that was meant to be seen.[18] The
sleeveless garment may have been popularized by King Charles II, based
on the facts that a diary entry by [Samuel
Pepys](Samuel_Pepys "wikilink") (October 8, 1666) records that ‘the King
hath yesterday Council declared his resolution of setting a fashion for
clothes...it will be a vest, I know not well how; but it is to teach the
nobility thrift.'[19]

The general layout of the vest in King Charles II’s time stands as
follows: buttons very closely sewn together arranged in two rows lined
the front body of the vest underneath a wide open coat face.[20] This
piece, however, was only deemed popular for an average of seven years
upon arrival to the public sphere.[21] However, while the vest died out
in elite city spaces, it is said to hav

[John Evelyn](John_Evelyn "wikilink") wrote about waistcoats on October
18, 1666: "To Court, it being the first time his Majesty put himself
solemnly into the Eastern fashion of vest, changing doublet, stiff
collar, bands and cloak, into a comely dress after the Persian mode,
with girdles or straps, and shoestrings and garters into buckles...
resolving never to alter it, and to leave the French mode".

[Samuel Pepys](Samuel_Pepys "wikilink"), the diarist and civil servant,
wrote in October 1666 that "the King hath yesterday in council declared
his resolution of setting a fashion for clothes which he will never
alter. It will be a vest, I know not well how". This royal decree
provided the first mention of the waistcoat. Pepys records "vest" as the
original term; the word "waistcoat" derives from the cutting of the coat
at waist-level, since at the time of the coining, tailors cut men's
formal coats well below the waist (see [dress
coat](dress_coat "wikilink")). An alternative theory is that, as
material was left over from the tailoring of a two-piece suit, it was
fashioned into a "waste-coat" to avoid that material being wasted,
although recent academic debate has cast doubt on this theory.

During the 17th century, troops of the regular army – and to some degree
also local militia – wore waistcoats which were the reverse colour of
their overcoats. It is believed that these were made by turning old
worn-out standard issue overcoats inside-out (so that the lining colour
appeared on the outside) and removing the sleeves. The term "waistcoat"
might therefore also be derived from the wastage of the old coat.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, men often wore elaborate and
brightly coloured waistcoats, until changing fashions in the nineteenth
century narrowed this to a more restricted palette, and the development
of [lounge suits](lounge_suits "wikilink") began the period of matching
informal waistcoats.

### 19th century

After the [French Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink") of 1789,
anti-aristocratic sentiment in France (and elsewhere in Europe)
influenced the wardrobes of both men and women, and waistcoats followed,
becoming much less elaborate. After about 1810 the fit of the waistcoat
became shorter and tighter, becoming much more secondary to the
frock-coat [overcoat](overcoat "wikilink") and almost counting as an
undergarment, although its popularity was larger than ever. With the new
[dandyism](dandyism "wikilink") of the early 19th century, the waistcoat
started to change roles, moving away from its function as the
centrepiece of the visual aspect of male clothing, towards serving as a
[foundation garment](foundation_garment "wikilink"), often with
figure-enhancing abilities.

From the 1820s onwards, elite gentlemen—at least those among the more
fashionable circles, especially the younger set and the
[military](military "wikilink")—wore [corsets](corset "wikilink"). The
waistcoat served to emphasize the new popularity of the cinched-in waist
for males, and became skin-tight, with the overcoat cut to emphasize the
figure: broader shoulders, a pouting chest, and a nipped-in waist.
Without a corset, a man's waistcoat often had
[whalebone](whalebone "wikilink") stiffeners and were laced in the back,
with reinforced buttons up the front, so that one could pull the lacings
in tight to mould the waist into the fashionable silhouette. [Prince
Albert](Albert,_Prince_Consort "wikilink"), husband of [Queen
Victoria](Queen_Victoria "wikilink"), had a reputation for his tight
corsets and tiny waist; and although he lacked popularity during his
early reign, men followed his [style](fashion "wikilink"), and
waistcoats became even more restrictive.

This fashion remained throughout the 19th century, although after about
1850 the style changed from that of a corseted look to a straighter
line, with less restriction at the waist, so that the waistcoat followed
a straighter line up the torso. Toward the end of the century, the
[Edwardian](Edwardian_era "wikilink") look made a larger physique more
popular—King [Edward VII](Edward_VII "wikilink") having a large figure.

### 20th–21st centuries

Waistcoats have also become popular within the indie and
[steampunk](steampunk "wikilink") subcultures in the United States.[22]
Vests are often worn both open or closed over dress shirts and even
[t-shirts](t-shirts "wikilink").

Although not related to formal wear, a type of waistcoat have also been
used as part of workers uniforms, such as at
[Walmart](Walmart "wikilink") prior to 2007,[23] and also as high
visibility clothing (usually bright "[safety
orange](safety_orange "wikilink")" color).

During the [2018 FIFA World Cup](2018_FIFA_World_Cup "wikilink"), the
manager of the [England football
team](England_national_football_team "wikilink"), [Gareth
Southgate](Gareth_Southgate "wikilink"), was often seen wearing a
waistcoat. British retailer [Marks &
Spencer](Marks_&_Spencer "wikilink"), the official suit provider for the
national team, reported a 35% increase in waistcoat sales during
England's first five games at the tournament.[24] Fashion search
platform [Lyst](Lyst_(company) "wikilink") also reported that online
waistcoat searches increased by over 40% during the course of the World
Cup. Part-way through the tournament, the [Museum of
London](Museum_of_London "wikilink") announced that it hoped to acquire
Gareth Southgate's waistcoat in order to display it as part of its
permanent collection of historic clothing.[25] In the run up to
England's semi-final match against
[Croatia](Croatia_national_football_team "wikilink"), the blood cancer
charity, [Bloodwise](Bloodwise "wikilink"), encouraged fans to take part
in 'Waistcoat Wednesday' to help raise funds for the charity, while also
supporting the England team.[26][27]

## Preliminary timeline and evolution

![](BLW_Man's_Court_Coat_and_Waistcoat.jpg "BLW_Man's_Court_Coat_and_Waistcoat.jpg")

### England

#### Circa 1660–1700

King Charles II inaugurated the "vest" (waistcoat) along with the modern
ideal of the three-piece suit.[28] The waistcoats of these three-piece
ensembles were the same length as the coat worn over it, most likely
knee length, and could be worn for either warmth or display.[29][30]

#### Circa 1700–1750

The coat, waistcoat, and [breeches](breeches "wikilink") were crafted
from the same fabric. Around the turn of the century, the waistcoat
became shorter, ending just below the waistline, allowing the breeches
to stick out.[31] When the weather was cold men often would wear more
than one waistcoat to stay warm.[32] As time went on, the vest that
matched the coat and pants was worn for formal wear while a vest of
different type or fabric acted as a more casual mode of contrasting
dress.[33]

#### Circa 1750–1770

Nearly halfway through the century, waistcoats became longer and
overlapped with the [breeches](breeches "wikilink").[34] Stylistically
waistcoats and the rest of the suit began to change in that they matched
less.[35] Instead of consisting of the same, highly decorative fabric,
it became popular to wear a waistcoat that complemented the coat and
breeches instead of matching it perfectly.[36] For instance, men would
mix solids and patterns within the waistcoat, coat, and breeches to
create a different look.[37]

#### Circa 1770–1800

Waistcoats became shorter, ended at the waist, and were constructed
similarly to the coat.[38] This way of styling the vest also was popular
in the 19th century throughout the advent of the modern Three-Piece
Suit.[39] In order to let the shirt show through, the neck of the vest
was left undone.[40] By the turn of the 19th century, it became popular
to utilize embroidery and brocade material.[41]

## From waistcoat to vest: timeline and evolution

### United States

#### Circa 1750–1850

The [American Revolutionary War](American_Revolutionary_War "wikilink")
brought British influence to the United States and with it came the
waistcoat.[42] The waistcoat in the United States originated as formal
wear to be worn underneath a coat.[43] Waistcoats became more ornate
including color and decor.[44]

#### Circa late 1800

Waistcoats were styled with new and patterned fabrics but just on the
front.[45] Around this time it became popular to use less expensive,
contrasting fabric on the back of the waistcoat design, allowing the
owner to not spend as much money on the waistcoat as a whole.[46] The
fabrics utilized in the creation of these plain, unseen back panels were
linen, cotton, or any other type of fabric used to line clothing
items.[47]

#### Circa 1870

Waistcoat collars became longer and visible outside of the coat worn
over it.[48] These collars were stiffened and would peak out over the
coat's [lapel](lapel "wikilink").[49] For both warmth against cold
weather or to show off special weaves and contrasting colors, men often
would layer their waistcoats.[50]

#### Circa 1890

The term vest completely replaced the British term waistcoat in American
common vernacular.[51] Vest style followed the guidelines of 1700s
England using the same fabric for the three-pieces, and sometimes used
patterns of plaid or checks for contrast purposes.[52]

#### Circa 1900

Around the turn of the 20th century, men were still wearing vests for
luxurious occasions. Vests sometimes even included embroidery or
hand-painted designs.[53] At the same time, men began wearing the vest
apart from the totality of the three-piece suit and more casually with a
variety of bottoms beyond the suit pant (khaki or jean).[54] Waistcoats
can be double-breasted with buttons set in a horseshoe pattern. The
lower and top buttons may be left undone although not for ridng or
hunting. Beyond this, some vests were made of certain durable fabrics to
withstand being worn for outdoor sport such as fishing or hunting.[55]

#### Circa 1970

In the 1970s women began wearing vests as part of their work attire. By
the late 1990s and early 2000s it became fashionable for women to wear
vests as part of their casual wear.[56]

## Typology

Today, there are many types of vests. Some types of vests include but
are not limited to:

-   Biker (motorcycle) vest: The [cut-off](cut-off "wikilink") is a type
    of vest typically made from a denim or leather jacket with sleeves
    removed. Popular among bikers in North America and Europe, they are
    often decorated with patches of logos or pictures of biker related
    subjects.[57]
-   Fishing vest: carries a profusion of external pockets for carrying
    fishing tackle.[58]
-   Billiards or pool competitions : vests-waistcoats are worn as formal
    attire by competitors.
-   Army : many regiments especially cavalry have their own regimental
    waistcoats to be worn with formal outfits.
-   Fringed vest: hippie movement of the 1960s inspired this folk
    style.[59]
-   Hunting vest: padded sleeveless jacket.[60]
-   Sweater vest: (American and Canadian English) This may also be
    called a slipover, sleeveless sweater, or, in British English, a
    tank top. In Australia, this may be colloquially referred to as a
    baldwin.[61]

## Gallery

<File:Vest> MET CI39.13.136 F.jpg\|1780-1795 American or European Silk
Vest <File:Vest> MET CI39.13.150 B.jpg\|1795-1800 American or European
Silk Vest <File:Vest> MET CI39.13.154 F.jpg\|1800-1815 American or
European Silk Vest <File:Vest> MET CI39.13.159 F.jpg\|1823 American or
European Vest <File:Vest> MET CI38.23.43 B.jpg\|1830-1849 American or
European Vest <File:Evening> vest MET 48.107.1 CP4.jpg\|1838 American
Silk, Cotton, Leather, Wool, Glass Evening Vest <File:Vest> MET
CI43.126.93.jpg\|1840 American or European Vest <File:Vest> MET
CI46.87.7 F.jpg\|1850 European Silk Vest <File:Vest> MET CI53.15.4
F.jpg\|Mid-19th Century American Cotton Vest <File:Vest> MET 1982.82.20
F.jpg\|Mid-19th Century American Linen and Wool Vest <File:Vest> MET
C.I.38.23.272 F.jpg\|1850-1889 American or European Vest <File:Vest> MET
CI41.40.1 F.jpg\|Circa 1870 American Silk Vest <File:Vest> MET CI39.13.9
B.jpg\|1880 European Leather and Wool Vest <File:Vest> MET CI50.49.5
F.jpg\|1885-1890 American or European Vest <File:Vest> MET CI42.90.1
B.jpg\|1892 American Silk Vest <File:Al> Capone in 1930.jpg\|1930
Three-Piece Suit (worn by Al Capone) <File:Vest.jpg%7CEuropean> Vest
<File:Back> of leather vest of a Latin American Motorcycle Association
member.jpg\|Cut-Off Biker Vest <File:Argyle> pattern sweater
vest.jpg\|Sweater Vest <File:James> Irwin, videographer.jpg\|Fisherman's
vest <File:French> waistcoat.jpg\|French waistcoat in silk, circa 1750,
[LACMA](LACMA "wikilink"). <File:Man's> waistcoat with corded quilting
c. 1760.jpg\|French waistcoat in cotton, circa 1760,
[LACMA](LACMA "wikilink"). <File:Child's> Beaded Waistcoat, late 19th or
early 20th century, X98.jpg\|*Child's Beaded Waistcoat*, Sioux (Native
American), late 19th or early 20th century, [Brooklyn
Museum](Brooklyn_Museum "wikilink") <File:Ruthie> Morris 1994
01.jpg\|Guitarist [Ruthie Morris](Ruthie_Morris "wikilink") of
[Magnapop](Magnapop "wikilink") wearing a [leopard
print](leopard_print "wikilink") vest on stage.

## See also

-   [Bulletproof vest](Bulletproof_vest "wikilink")
-   [Jacket](Jacket "wikilink")
-   [Suicide vest](Suicide_vest "wikilink")
-   [Sleeveless shirt](Sleeveless_shirt "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Waistcoats in the collections of the Bowes
    Museum](http://www.thebowesmuseum.org.uk/collections/objects/advanced-search/?title=Men%27s+Waistcoat)
-   [Waiscoats in the collections of the Philadelphia Museum of
    Art](http://www.philamuseum.org/collections/results.html?searchTxt=man%27s+waistcoat)
-   [Waiscoats on the collections of the Victoria and Albert
    Museum](https://collections.vam.ac.uk/search/?limit=45&narrow=1&q=waistcoat&commit=Search&quality=2&after-adbc=AD&before-adbc=AD)

[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:History of clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Vests](Category:Vests "wikilink") [Category:Suits
(clothing)](Category:Suits_(clothing) "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6] *<https://www.etymonline.com/word/vest>.*

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10] .

[11] *Davies, Stephanie Curtis. 1994. Costume Language: A Dictionary of
Dress Terms. Malvern: Cressrelles.*

[12] *De Marly, Diana. "King Charles II's Own Fashion: The Theatrical
Origins of the English Vest." Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld
Institutes 37 (1974): 378-82. <doi:10.2307/750857>.*

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28] Kuchta, David. "The Three-Piece Suit and Modern Masculinity."
University of California Press, (2002).

[29] *Lynch, Annette and Mitchell D. Strauss.*Ethnic Dress in the United
States: A Cultural Encyclopedia*. 2015.*

[30]

[31] *Condra, Jill. 2008. The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Clothing through
World History. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.*

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]