**Weighted vests for children** are sometimes used to try to treat
symptoms of certain [developmental
disorders](developmental_disorder "wikilink") such as [attention deficit
hyperactivity
disorder](attention_deficit_hyperactivity_disorder "wikilink") or
[autism](autism "wikilink") in children. Evidence, however, have not
found them to be useful for this purpose.[1][2]

The [vests](vest "wikilink") are weighted down with sand or other heavy
materials. Terms used for such items of clothing include **sand vests**,
**compression vests** or **squeeze jackets**.[3]

## Effectiveness

A review of the use of weighted clothing indicates that they are not
useful with respect to hyperactivity, clumsiness, or repetitive
behavior.[4] A 2015 review of treatments for [autism](autism "wikilink")
found only a single study of five people that showed any benefit and six
trials that showed no benefit resulting in the overall conclusion of no
benefit.[5]

## Application

The use of weighted vests for children originated in the United States
as a form of therapy for children with autism.[6] By 2017, the use of
weighted vests had become common in public schools in
[Hamburg](Hamburg "wikilink"), Germany. Teachers there reported that
students wore the vests voluntarily for up to 30 minutes at a time, and
that the vests were popular with the children. Media reports about this
practice triggered controversy and criticism because of the lack of
long-term studies of the effect of wearing such vests.[7][8]

## References

[Category:Alternative therapies for developmental and learning
disabilities](Category:Alternative_therapies_for_developmental_and_learning_disabilities "wikilink")
[Category:Vests](Category:Vests "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]