---
title: Boxer shorts
permalink: /Boxer_shorts/
---

**Boxer shorts** (also known as **loose boxers** or as simply
**boxers**) are a type of undergarment typically worn by men. The term
has been used in English since 1944 for all-around-elastic shorts, so
named after the shorts worn by boxers, for whom unhindered leg movement
("footwork") is very important. Boxers come in a variety of styles and
design but are characterized by their loose fit.

## Details

Most boxer shorts have a fly in front. Boxer shorts manufacturers have a
couple of methods of closing the fly: metal snaps or a button or two.
However, many boxer shorts on the market do not need a fastening
mechanism to close up the fly as the fabric is cut and the shorts are
designed to sufficiently overlap and fully cover the opening. This is
commonly known as an open fly design.

Since boxer shorts fabric is rarely stretchy, a "balloon seat", a
generous panel of loosely fitting fabric in the center rear of the
shorts, is designed to accommodate the wearer's various movements,
especially bending forward. The most common sewing design of boxer
shorts are made with a panel seat that has two seams running on the
outer edges of the back seating area, creating a center rear panel. Most
mass-produced commercial boxer shorts are made using this design.
Gripper boxer shorts with one snap and one fly button Two less common
forms of boxer shorts are "gripper" boxers and "yoke front" boxers.
Gripper boxers have an elastic waistband like regular boxers but have
snaps, usually 3, on the fly and on the waistband so that they open up
completely. Yoke front boxer shorts with three yoke snaps and an open
fly Yoke front boxers are similar to gripper boxers in that the wide
waistband yoke can be opened up completely, and the yoke usually has
three snaps to close it while the fly itself, below, has no closure
mechanism. There are two types of yoke boxers: one in which there is a
short piece of elastic on each side of the waistband which snugs up the
yoke to fit the waist; and "tie-sides" which have narrow cloth tapes on
each side of the waist yoke, like strings, which are tightened and
knotted by the wearer to make an exact fit. This style of underwear was
very common during World War II, when the rubber needed for elastic
waistbands had to be used for military purposes.

Boxer shorts are available in white and solid colors including pastels,
and come in a variety of patterns and prints as well; Traditional
patterns include "geometrics" (small repeating geometric designs),
plaids and vertical stripes. Additionally, there are innumerable
"novelty" boxer short patterns. Boxer shorts are produced using various
fabrics including all cotton, cotton/polyester blends, jersey knits,
satin, and silk. [Category:Shorts](/Category:Shorts "wikilink")
[Category:Underwear](/Category:Underwear "wikilink")