---
title: Backpack
permalink: /Backpack/
---

[thumb\|right\|150px\|A modern backpack](/File:Rucksack1.jpg "wikilink")
[150px\|thumb\|[Swiss army](Swiss_army "wikilink") backpack
1960](/File:Rucksack_Schweizer_Armee_1960er_a.jpg "wikilink")
[150px\|thumb\|Integrated bearer (internal)
frame](/File:Rucksack_Schweizer_Armee_1960er_b.jpg "wikilink")

A **backpack**—also called **knapsack**, **rucksack**, **rucksac**,
**pack**, **sackpack**, **booksack**, **bookbag** or **backsack**—is, in
its simplest frameless form, a cloth sack carried on one's back and
secured with two straps that go over the shoulders, but it can have an
external frame, internal frame, and there are bodypacks.

Backpacks are commonly used by [hikers](/hiking "wikilink") and
[students](/student "wikilink"), and are often preferred to
[handbags](/handbag "wikilink") for carrying heavy loads or carrying any
sort of equipment, because of the limited capacity to carry heavy
weights for long periods of time in the hands.

Large backpacks, used to carry loads over , as well as smaller sports
backpacks (e.g. running, cycling, hiking and hydration), usually offload
the largest part (up to about 90%) of their weight onto padded hip
belts, leaving the shoulder straps mainly for stabilising the load. This
improves the potential to carry heavy loads, as the hips are stronger
than the shoulders, and also increases agility and balance, since the
load rides nearer the wearer's own center of [mass](/mass "wikilink").

## Terminology

The word **backpack** was coined in the United States in the 1910s.
*Moneybag* and *packsack* were used prior, and now occur mainly as
[regionalisms](/Dialect "wikilink").

The word **rucksack** is a German [loanword](/loanword "wikilink")
mainly used in the UK, US and in other Western military forces. In
German, *Rücken* means "back" and *Sack* means "bag". The name rucksack
is cognate with the Danish *rygsæk*, Norwegian *ryggsekk*, Dutch
*rugzak*, Afrikaans *rugsak*, Swedish *ryggsäck*, and Russian *рюкзак*
(*rjukzak*).

The word **knapsack** was the usual name for a rucksack or backpack up
until the middle of the 20th century. This is commonly used in
[Canada](/Canada "wikilink").

Alternative names include [haversack](/haversack "wikilink") from the
German *Hafersack* meaning "oat sack"[1] (which more properly describes
a small cloth bag on a strap worn over one shoulder and originally
referred to the bag of [oats](/oats "wikilink") carried as horse
fodder), *Kraxe* (a German rucksack with a rigid framework), and
*bergen* (a large load-carrying rucksack, from a design issued by the
British Army during the Second World War).[2] In fact, Britons used to
call Alpine-style backpacks "Bergen rucksacks", maybe from the name of
their creator, Norwegian [Ole F. Bergan](/Ole_F._Bergan "wikilink"),
combined with the name of the Norwegian city of
[Bergen](/Bergen "wikilink").

Backpacks can often simply be referred to as "packs", especially in
outdoors contexts; though sometimes ambiguous compared to other bags
such as [saddlebags](/saddlebag "wikilink") and [duffel
bags](/duffel_bag "wikilink"), context is generally sufficient for
identification. They are also used in recreational activities, and have
long since been used to carry sports equipment and other materials.

Long before its various terminologies began appearing in print, evidence
of early backpacks was scarce. A contender for the earliest was found
within the mummified remains of [Ötzi](/Ötzi "wikilink") in 3300BC.[3]

## Backpack designs

[thumb\|150px\|right\|Frameless
backpack](/File:Frankfurt_am_Main_(DerHexer)_2012-05-11_01.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb\|150px\|right\|A back frame with shelf used to carry loads in the
[Allgäu](Allgäu "wikilink"), where it is known as a
*Reff*](/File:Reffunbeladen.jpg "wikilink") [thumb\|150px\|right\|Two
examples of external frame backpack designs dating to the
1860s](/File:1860s_external_frame_packs.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb\|150px\|right\|Modern
frame](/File:FjällRäven-Fire-Brigade-Frame-HB-08oct2010.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb\|150px\|Backpack with non flexible composite
straps[4]](/File:Backpack_with_non_flexible_composite_straps.png "wikilink")
Backpacks in general fall into one of four categories: frameless,
external frame, internal frame, and bodypack. A pack frame, when
present, serves to support the pack and distribute the weight of its
contents across the body more appropriately, by transferring much of the
weight to the hips and legs. Most of the weight is therefore taken off
the shoulders, reducing the chance of injury from shoulder strap
pressure (many backpacks equipped solely with shoulder straps can affect
the posture of a person carrying more than 14 kg (30 lbs)), as well as
being less restrictive of the upper body range of motion. Most backpacks
are capable of being closed with either a [buckle](/buckle "wikilink")
mechanism, a [zipper](/zipper "wikilink"), or a dry-bag type closure,
though a few models use a drawstring fitted with a [cord
lock](/cord_lock "wikilink") for the main compartment.

A bodypack is a backpack fitted with one or more pockets that are
suspended on the wearer's chest and loaded in such a way that the load
in the front and the load in the back are close to equal. The majority
of the load in a bodypack is carried by the hips. The ideal load
carrying system should not disturb the wearer's natural posture, balance
and maneuverability. The load must be dispersed onto the skeletal
structure in an even manner, and should not produce unbalanced forces on
the body.

### Frameless

The simplest backpack design is a bag attached to a set of shoulder
straps. Such packs are used for general transportation of goods, and
have variable capacity. The simplest designs consist of one main pocket.
This may be combined with [webbing](/webbing "wikilink") or
[cordage](/Rope "wikilink") straps, while more sophisticated models add
extra pockets, waist straps, chest straps, padded shoulder straps,
padded backs, and sometimes reflective materials for added safety at
night. These packs are generally produced inexpensively.

Some outdoor packs, particularly those sold for day hikes, [ultralight
backpacking](/ultralight_backpacking "wikilink") and
[mountaineering](/mountaineering "wikilink") are sometimes frameless as
well.

#### Sports

Sports and hydration backpacks are smaller with a profile closer to the
body, wider straps and can come with water bladders and hip belts for
running, cycling or hiking. Running hydration packs are the smallest and
lightest, many under 2 litres and most under six litres. Compression
straps across the top of one's body are common as are hip belts. Cycling
hydration packs are six to ten litres sitting high on the back. Although
daypacks are small averaging ten to thirty litres, all Trekking and
Hiking hydration packs are generally the largest and heaviest. Thirty
five up to sixty five litres and above are common.

### External frame packs

External frame packs were designed to carry heavy loads (>20 kg or
40 lb), giving the wearer more support and protection and better weight
distribution than a simple, frameless strapped bag. Wooden pack frames
were used for centuries around the world. [Ötzi the
Iceman](/Ötzi_the_Iceman "wikilink") may have used one in [Copper
Age](/Copper_Age "wikilink") Alpine Italy,[5][6] though some
archaeologists believe the frame found with the body was part of a
[snowshoe](/snowshoe "wikilink"). Such packs are common in
[military](/military "wikilink") and
[mountaineering](/mountaineering "wikilink") applications;[7] metal
versions first appeared in the mid-20th century.

The external frame is typically made from aluminum, other lightweight
metal alloy, and recently reinforced [synthetic
polymers](/synthetic_polymers "wikilink") or
[plastic](/plastic "wikilink") and is equipped with a system of straps
and tautly-stretched netting which prevents contact between the metal
frame and user's back. In addition to comfort, this "stand-off" provides
the additional benefit of creating air circulation between the frame and
the wearer's back. For this reason, external frame packs are generally
considered to be a "cooler load" than internal frame designs. External
frame packs have a fabric "sack" portion which is usually smaller than
that of internal frame packs, but have exposed frame portions above and
below the sack to accommodate attachment of larger items. In addition,
the sack can often be removed entirely, permitting the user to customize
the configuration of their load, or to transport a non-conventional load
such as a quartered game animal. Military packs are often external frame
designs due to their ability to carry loads of different shapes, sizes
and weights.

The other type of external frame which recently was proposed, is made
from [composite](/Composite_material "wikilink")
[plastic](/plastic "wikilink") which is not flexible like current
backpack straps and also it is a kind of material that can be shaped
like human spine curvature. In this type of backpack, load directly
transfers to the shoulders through the non-flexible straps. This
non-flexible structure diminishes the momentum at lumbar region of the
back. Strap curvature is shaped close to spine curvature and there are
two flexible drawstrings to prevent backpack movement in transverse
plane. The straps of this backpack are wide enough to distribute the
pressure on shoulders and also a white glass wool layer is added to the
internal part of them to absorb dynamic forces, which could be produced
through walking. This backpack type is an experimental sample that need
further options to be prepared for usage. One of the benefits of
backpack with external frame is preventing the spine to incline forward
during walking that would be helpful in preventing damage of long term
backpack carrying.[8]

### Internal frame packs

The internal frame backpack is a recent innovation, invented in 1967 by
Greg Lowe, who went on to found [Lowe Alpine](/Lowe_Alpine "wikilink")
and [Lowepro](/Lowepro "wikilink"), companies specializing in backpacks
and other forms of carrying bags for various equipment.[9] An
internal-frame pack has a large fabric section around an internal frame
composed of strips of either aluminum, titanium or plastic, sometimes
with additional metal stays to reinforce the frame. A complex series of
straps works with the frame to distribute the weight and hold it in
place. The internal frame permits the pack to fit closely to the
wearer's back and minimizes shifting of the load, which is desirable
when participating in activities that involve upper-body movement such
as scrambling over rocky surfaces and skiing. However, the tight fit
reduces ventilation, so these type of packs tend to be more sweaty than
external frame packs. The internal construction also allows for a large
storage compartment; a few lash points (including webbing loops and
straps for sleeping bags and other large items) may be present, but as
the frame is completely integrated, it is difficult to securely lash
larger and heavier items which do not fit inside the compartment to the
outside of the pack. Internal frame packs originally suffered from
smaller load capacity and less comfortable fit during steady walking,
but newer models have improved greatly in these respects. In addition,
because of their snug fit, the improved internal frame models have
largely replaced external frame backpacks for many activities.

## Daily use

[thumb\|right\|150px\|Daypack](/File:Bag_purchased_from_Johor_Bahru.jpg "wikilink")
A daypack is a smaller, frameless backpack that can hold enough contents
for a day hike, or a day's worth of other activities. They are not large
enough for average [wilderness
backpacking](/Backpacking_(wilderness) "wikilink") that use full-sized
[sleeping bags](/sleeping_bag "wikilink") and backpacking tents, but may
be large enough for [ultralight
backpacking](/ultralight_backpacking "wikilink"). Padded or unpadded
waist straps may be provided to distribute weight across the body.

[thumb\|right\|150px\|School
bag](/File:School_bag_backpack.jpg "wikilink") In many countries,
backpacks are heavily identified with [students](/student "wikilink"),
and are a primary means of transporting educational materials to and
from school.[10] In this context they are sometimes known as bookbags or
schoolbags. The purchase of a suitably fashionable, attractive, and
useful backpack is a crucial back-to-school ritual for many
students.[11] [thumb\|right\|150px\|Loose
Carrying[12]](/File:低めリュック背負い_(7391288036).jpg "wikilink")

Typical school backpacks generally lack the rigid frame of an
outdoor-style backpack and include only a few pockets in the front in
addition to the main storage compartment. While traditionally very
simple in design, school backpacks are often made with padded shoulder
straps and backs as well as additional reinforcement to hold large
numbers of heavy textbooks, as well as safety features such as
reflective panels to make the wearer of the pack more visible at night.

Backpacks are sometimes worn as fashion accessories, in which they
perform the same function as a purse.[13] Some such backpacks designed
specifically for women are no larger than a typical purse, and are
generally associated with younger women.

## Special-purpose backpacks

Some backpacks are specifically designed to carry certain items. Common
examples include backpacks for small valuable items such as
[laptops](/laptop "wikilink") and [cameras](/camera "wikilink");[14]
backpacks designed to hold laptop computers in particular generally have
a padded compartment to hold the computer and medium-sized pockets and
flaps to accommodate accessories such as charger cables and mice. These
are especially common in college and university settings. In order to
supply these devices with electricity, a few high-end backpacks are
equipped with solar panels.[15]

Rolling backpacks are backpacks with wheels on the bottom and an
extending handle. Because of their design, rolling backpacks reduce the
strain on the user, though the shoulder straps may be used to carry the
pack for short distances when the terrain is not suitable for wheels.
Rolling backpacks are most commonly used while traveling by airplane or
train.

[Hydration backpacks](/Hydration_backpack "wikilink") are also
available. These light daypacks are especially designed to hold water in
a special water bladder (also known as reservoir), and their purpose is
to allow the carrier constant fluid hydration handsfree, so that the
carrier can focus on the mission ahead without having to stop for water
breaks.

## Professional use

Backpacks are a standard part of the load-bearing equipment of soldiers,
especially [infantry](/infantry "wikilink"), in most countries, and
military-style packs are regularly available to civilians in [military
surplus](/military_surplus "wikilink") stores. Well-known examples
include the United States [ALICE field
pack](/All-purpose_Lightweight_Individual_Carrying_Equipment "wikilink")
and the British Army
[PLCE](/Personal_Load_Carrying_Equipment "wikilink") rucksack
attachment, both of which are widely available to civilian markets both
as actual military surplus (new or used) and as replicas. Such packs are
often, though not always (e.g. the
[USMC](/United_States_Marine_Corps "wikilink")'s
[ILBE](/Improved_Load_Bearing_Equipment "wikilink") pack),
external-frame packs, with the pack itself lashed or
[pinned](/Circle_cotter "wikilink") to a metal or plastic carrying
frame. For units that are entering combat situations, packs may be
loaded heavily and can weigh in excess of . Each soldier may carry extra
weapons, ammunition, rations, medical supplies, tents or other shelter
material, and extra clothing.

Many police tactical units, as well as players of military-style combat
games such as paintball and airsoft, use these military-style tactical
backpacks and webbing for storing gear and ammunition. There is also a
small but thriving industry devoted to creating historical reproductions
of military gear; such companies generally produce period-appropriate
uniforms and other gear in addition to backpacks.

Some more recent military/tactical designs, especially the
[MOLLE](/MOLLE "wikilink") and [ILBE](/ILBE "wikilink") packs used by
the United States armed forces, are covered with webbing loop attachment
points for increased carrying capacity.

Recently, at least one brand of backpack has been specially designed for
professional cooks and culinary students. This sort of backpack is meant
to safely carry knives, cooking tools, and other miscellaneous equipment
such as notebooks, towels, and uniforms.

Specialist backpacks are used by fire services for wildfire fighting, as
well as by rescue services for Search and Rescue. These backpacks are
generally very modular, allowing the pack to be reconfigured to the
users wishes and are designed to load around the wearers hips. They may
include features such as sections for water bladders and specially
designed pouches, such as those used to carry personal fire shelters.

### Image gallery

|                                                                                                       |                                                                                    |                                                                                    |                                                                                     |                                                                                     |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [thumb\|150px\|MOLLE patrol pack](/File:MOLLE_system_40l_patrol_pack_2013-04-06_20-04.jpg "wikilink") | [thumb\|150px\|Tropical Rucksack (back)](/File:Tropical_Rucksack_1.JPG "wikilink") | [thumb\|150px\|Tropical Rucksack (side)](/File:Tropical_Rucksack_3.JPG "wikilink") | [thumb\|150px\|Tropical Rucksack (front)](/File:Tropical_Rucksack_2.JPG "wikilink") | [thumb\|140px\|Military backpack](/Image:Molle_Rucksack_NG0805_1179.jpg "wikilink") |

## Backpacks for travel

[thumb\|150px\|right\|Luggage and
backpacks](/File:WJT2005_Luggage.jpg "wikilink") Backpacks are sometimes
used as [luggage](/luggage "wikilink"), particularly as carry-on bags
for airplane travel.

In addition to their use in outdoors pursuits, backpacks are sometimes
used in other sports as well. [Hydration
packs](/Hydration_pack "wikilink"), sometimes used by athletes and
military personnel, carry water (in either a bladder or a rigid bottle)
and have a tube connected to them from which the wearer can drink
without removing the pack; this feature is also included in some more
general-purpose hiking backpacks. Backpacks that carry
[skateboards](/skateboard "wikilink") have also become more popular in
the youth culture.

## See also

-   [Backpack palsy](/Backpack_palsy "wikilink")
-   [Bindle](/Bindle "wikilink")
-   [Duffel bag](/Duffel_bag "wikilink")
-   [Fanny pack](/Fanny_pack "wikilink")
-   [Hydration pack](/Hydration_pack "wikilink")
-   [Messenger bag](/Messenger_bag "wikilink")
-   [Papoose](/Papoose "wikilink")
-   [Pasiking](/Pasiking "wikilink")
-   [Satchel](/Satchel "wikilink")
-   [Shoulder strap](/Shoulder_strap "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Bags](/Category:Bags "wikilink") [Category:Camping
equipment](/Category:Camping_equipment "wikilink") [Category:Domestic
implements](/Category:Domestic_implements "wikilink") [Category:Hiking
equipment](/Category:Hiking_equipment "wikilink")
[Category:Luggage](/Category:Luggage "wikilink")

[1]

[2] [National Army Museum: Bergen rucksack, War Department
issue](http://www.nam.ac.uk/online-collection/detail.php?acc=1982-11-144-1)

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10] Bruce Horovitz, "New 'badge' of cool: High-tech, high-fashion
backpacks," *[USA Today](/USA_Today "wikilink")*, 20 August 2007, 1A.

[11] Horovitz, 1A.

[12] [Loose Backpack Carrying « Tokyo
Stories](http://www.tokyo-stories.com/2010/08/loose-backpack-carrying.html)
August 18th, 2010

[13]

[14]

[15]