---
title: Dillybag
permalink: /Dillybag/
---

[thumb\|Dillybags from [Arnhem
Land](Arnhem_Land "wikilink").](/File:National_Museum_of_Ethnology,_Osaka_-_Dillybag_(Pandanus_fiber)_-_Arnhem_Land_in_Australia.jpg "wikilink")
A **dillybag** or **dilly bag** is a traditional [Australian
Aboriginal](/Australian_Aborigines "wikilink") bag, generally woven from
the fibres of plant species of the *[Pandanus](/Pandanus "wikilink")*
[genus](/genus "wikilink").. It is used for a variety of food
transportation and preparation purposes.

*Dilly* comes from the [Jagera](/Turrubal_language "wikilink") word
*dili*, which refers to both the bag and the plants from which it is
made.[1]

The dilly bag, otherwise known as **yakou**, **yibali** or **but but
bag**, is a bag worn around the neck to hold food like berries, meat,
fish etc. The Dilly bag is normally woven out of vines or tough dried
grasses and sometimes had feathers or animal fur inside the bag to stop
small pieces of food falling through holes in the weave. Mainly used by
women to gather food but can be used by men to help carry some tools for
hunting.

Another use for the dilly bag (also named Mukurtu) was as a holder for
personal or tribal artifacts. The "Dilly bag" term is also used to
describe bags used by non-aboriginal Australians, for example a smaller
food bag carried by [swagmen](/swagmen "wikilink") along with their
swags.[2] The term is also used by Australians to describe similar bags
for other purposes.

## References

## Further reading

-

[Category:Australian Aboriginal
bushcraft](/Category:Australian_Aboriginal_bushcraft "wikilink")
[Category:Australian
inventions](/Category:Australian_inventions "wikilink")
[Category:Bags](/Category:Bags "wikilink") [Category:Indigenous
Australian culture](/Category:Indigenous_Australian_culture "wikilink")

[1] Dixon et al. (2006): p. 184.

[2]