---
title: It bag
permalink: /It_bag/
---

[thumb\|The *2.55* by Chanel.](/File:Chanel_2.55.jpg "wikilink") An **It
bag** is a high-priced designer handbag that has become a popular
best-seller. The phenomenon arose in the fashion industry and was named
in the 1990s and 2000s. Examples of handbag brands that have been
considered "It bags" are [Chanel](/Chanel "wikilink"),
[Hermès](/Hermès "wikilink") and [Fendi](/Fendi "wikilink").

## History

One of the first designers credited with creating the concept of the
easily identifiable "status bag" was [Giuliana
Camerino](/Giuliana_Camerino "wikilink"), founder in 1945 of the
Venetian fashion house Roberta di Camerino.[1] Camerino's handbags were
instantly recognisable due to their artisan-made hardware and
distinctive use of fabrics formerly reserved for clothing. Her
innovations included in 1946, bags patterned with a trellis of R's
(foreshadowing [Gucci](/Gucci "wikilink")'s G's), woven leather bags in
1957 (predating [Bottega Veneta](/Bottega_Veneta "wikilink")) and in
1964, she designed a handbag with a unique articulated frame which was
later taken up by [Prada](/Prada "wikilink").[2]

The fashion houses of [Hermès](/Hermès "wikilink"),
[Chanel](/Chanel "wikilink") and [Louis
Vuitton](/Louis_Vuitton "wikilink") created handbags that became famous
in their own right well before the concept of the "It bag" took hold. In
1935 Hermès created a top-handled leather bag called a *sac à dépêches*
as part of their leather goods range. In 1956 this design was renamed
the *[Kelly](/Kelly_bag "wikilink")* after being prominently worn by
[Grace Kelly](/Grace_Kelly "wikilink").[3] [Coco
Chanel](/Coco_Chanel "wikilink") first created her quilted-leather
*[2.55](/Chanel_2.55 "wikilink")* in February 1955.[4] In 1984, Hermès
modified another of their designs, the *Haut à Courroies* (originally
created around 1900) to create a bag for the actress and singer [Jane
Birkin](/Jane_Birkin "wikilink").[5] The
*[Birkin](/Birkin_bag "wikilink")* subsequently became one of the most
desirable, widely recognised bags during the 1990s and early 2000s
designer bag craze.

The term "It bag" was coined in the 1990s with the explosive growth of
the handbag market in fashion. Designers competed to produce a single,
easily recognisable design which, if cleverly marketed, endorsed by the
fashion press, or seen being carried by a celebrity, would become that
season's must-have bag, selling in large numbers. Designers such as
Bottega Veneta, Chanel, [Fendi](/Fendi "wikilink"), Hermès, Prada,
Gucci, and Vuitton continued to be known as creators of desirable bags,
rather than enjoying fame for one or two specific models. Among the more
successful individual designs created during this time were the
*Paddington* by [Chloé](/Chloé "wikilink"), the *Motorcycle* by
[Balenciaga](/Balenciaga "wikilink"), and the *Alexa* (named for [Alexa
Chung](/Alexa_Chung "wikilink")) by
[Mulberry](/Mulberry_(company) "wikilink").[6] Chloé, in order to
enhance the prestige and scarcity of the *Paddington*, enforced a
waiting list for orders, although this led impatient customers to
knowingly purchase counterfeit bags.[7] Must-have bags for a particular
season were often targeted by criminals and stolen to order, to be sold
for significantly reduced prices to people who wanted a fashionable bag
without paying full retail.[8] For example, in 2007, the targeted bags
were the [Lanvin](/Lanvin_(clothing) "wikilink") *Olga Sac* and the
[Givenchy](/Givenchy "wikilink") *Bettina*, and in 2008, they were the
Chanel *2.55* and the Balenciaga *Motorcycle*.[9]

In the early 2000s the conceptual New York label *Slow and Steady Wins
the Race*, founded by the Chinese-American designer [Mary
Ping](/Mary_Ping "wikilink"), offered a range of consciously affordable
bags deliberately based on It bags by Balenciaga, Dior and Gucci, but
made in inexpensive calico with metalwork from [hardware
stores](/hardware_store "wikilink") mirroring the original bags'
exclusive designer fittings.[10] These bags were *Slow and Steady*'s way
of challenging the concept of consumerism and inbuilt
[obsolescence](/obsolescence "wikilink") in traditional fashion
manufacture.[11]

By 2008 the popularity of the "It bag" was reported to be in
decline.[12] In May 2011, whilst acknowledging that there would always
be customers for expensive status bags, Celia Walden reported that the
concept of the must-have "It bag" was no longer in fashion.[13]

## See also

-   [It girl](/It_girl "wikilink")

## References

## Further reading

-   Eric Wilson, [Is This It for the It
    Bag?](https://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/01/fashion/01BAGS.html?_r=1&adxnnl=1&oref=slogin&adxnnlx=1206891689-5lylyR7uHFQ+edZdUsZ1eA),
    *New York Times*, Nov. 1, 2007. Accessed 30 March 2012.
-   [The It bags...a
    must?](https://web.archive.org/web/20140512223418/http://news.softpedia.com/news/Bag-It-All-Up-45028.shtml),
    Softpedia, January 22, 2007. Accessed 30 March 2012.

[Category:Bags (fashion)](/Category:Bags_(fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:Leather goods](/Category:Leather_goods "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](/Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](/Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](/Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](/Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Fashion
accessories](/Category:Fashion_accessories "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11] [Mary
Ping](http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/c/contemporary-new-york-fashion/)
in the *New York Fashion Now* exhibition at the Victoria and Albert
Museum

[12]

[13]