---
title: Tote bag
permalink: /Tote_bag/
---

[alt=\|thumb\|A Tote bag](/File:Totebag.jpg "wikilink") A **tote bag**
is a large and often unfastened bag with parallel handles that emerge
from the sides of its pouch. The word **tote** is probably African in
origin and came into English via [Gullah](/Gullah "wikilink"). Totes are
often used as [reusable shopping
bags](/reusable_shopping_bag "wikilink").

The archetypal tote bag is made of sturdy cloth, perhaps with thick
leather at its handles or bottom; leather versions often have a pebbled
surface. Common fabrics include heavy [canvas](/canvas "wikilink"),
possibly dyed, or treated to resist moisture and mold.
[Jute](/Jute "wikilink") is another traditional material, though less
popular. In recent decades, heavy [nylon](/nylon "wikilink") and other
easy-care synthetics have become common, although these may degrade with
prolonged sun-exposure. Many of today's inexpensive or free totes are
often made from recycled matter, from minimally-processed natural
fibers, or from byproducts of processes that refine organic materials.

## Environmental concerns

[thumb\|A promotional tote bag](/File:Wikipedia_tote_bag.JPG "wikilink")
Recently, tote bags have been sold as a more eco-friendly replacement
for disposable [plastic bags](/plastic_bags "wikilink"), given they can
be reused multiples times. They have also been given away as promotional
items. A study by the UK Environment Agency found that cotton canvas
bags have to be reused at least 131 times before they can match the
carbon expenditure of a single disposable plastic bag, and up to 327
times if the plastic bags are used as bin liners.[1] Meanwhile, tote
bags made from recycled polypropylene plastic require 11 (up to 26 when
considering reuse as bin liners for plastic bags) reuses to match.

A 2014 study of U.S. consumers found that the 28% of respondents who own
reusable bags forgot them on approximately 40% of their grocery trips
and used the bags only about 15 times each before discarding them. About
half of this group typically chose to use plastic bags over reusable
ones, despite owning reusable bags and recognizing their benefits.[2] An
increasing number of jurisdictions have mandated the [phase-out of
lightweight plastic
bags](/phase-out_of_lightweight_plastic_bags "wikilink") to reduce land
and ocean pollution. In order to provide an incentive for consumers to
remember reusable bags more often these laws establish a minimum price
for bags at checkout and require either paper, reusable fabric tote
bags, or thick reusable plastic bags.

## References

## Further reading

-

[Category:Bags](/Category:Bags "wikilink")

[1]

[2]