**Fashion activism** is the practice of using fashion as a means of
social change. It merges popular styles of dress, from clothing and
shoes, to headwear and accessories, with efforts to implement social and
political change. **Fashion activism** can be used as a form of
[protest](protest "wikilink"), whether expressing dissent or support.

The term 'fashion activism' was coined by designer [Céline
Semaan](Céline_Semaan_Vernon "wikilink"). The New York based founder of
the design and tech lab Slow Factory has used key items in her
collections as means of fashion activism; a 'Dignity Key' necklace with
which people can show support for displaced Middle Eastern refugees, a
'Banned' scarf showing the universal impact of President Trump's Muslim
ban, and a '1st Amendment Flight Jacket' collaboration with
[ACLU](American_Civil_Liberties_Union "wikilink"), featuring the [First
Amendment](First_Amendment_to_the_United_States_Constitution "wikilink")
text written in Arabic, standing up to the rise in [islamophobia in the
United States](islamophobia_in_the_United_States "wikilink") and [hate
crimes](Hate_crime "wikilink") against American Muslims.

Other examples of fashion activism range from apparel with [peace
sign](Peace_symbols "wikilink") symbols that were popularized in the
mid-1900s, to the '[Make America Great
Again](Make_America_Great_Again "wikilink")' hats sported by Donald
Trump supporters throughout and following the 2016 presidential
campaign.

## Fashion Design Items That Influenced Socio-Political Events

### The Mini Skirt

The mini skirt made its debut in 1964 and quickly became a bastion of
youth culture and defiance[1]. [Mary Quant](Mary_Quant "wikilink"), the
London-based designer responsible for the skirt, sought to reflect an
era that was “arrogant, aggressive, and sexy.”[2] Accordingly, the mini
skirt was a popular choice for independent and progressive women in the
1960s. During the violent protests and events of [May 1968 in
France](May_1968_in_France "wikilink"), the mini skirt became a symbol
of female revolution and defiance. [Andre
Courrèges](Andre_Courrèges "wikilink") popularized the hemline in
France. While the nostalgia of the 1970s saw a return to more
conventional hemlines, the mini skirt persists as a symbol of women’s
rights and sexual liberation to this day.

### The Slogan T-Shirt

The slogan T-shirt has been favored by activists since its inception.
Fueled by the DIY ethos of the punk era, [Vivienne
Westwood’s](Vivienne_Westwood "wikilink") subversive t-shirt designs
brought the slogan aesthetic into the mainstream in the 1970s. In 1979,
designer [Katharine Hamnett](Katharine_Hamnett "wikilink") launched a
label and line of shirts driven by the concept of ‘[right
livelihood](right_livelihood "wikilink");’ the shirt slogans were based
on the central messages of [Buddhism](Buddhism "wikilink"). The T-shirts
were “designed to be seminal, to make people think, and then hopefully
act,” Hamnett said in an interview.[3] In recent years, slogan tees have
become a staple in popular culture, from runways to stadiums. British
designer Daniel W. Fletcher organized an anti-Brexit sit-in with
protesters wearing “stay” shirts and hoodies. Many prominent designers
and labels such as [Dior](Dior "wikilink"), Public School,
[Everlane](Everlane "wikilink"), and [Slow
Factory](https://slowfactory.com/) have produced slogans supporting
women’s rights, gay rights, immigrants, refugees, and conservation
efforts.

### The Keffiyeh

The [Keffiyeh](Keffiyeh "wikilink") is a traditional black and white
scarf worn around the head or neck. According to design critic Hala
Malak, the Keffiyeh dates back to pre-Islamic [Sumer](Sumer "wikilink").
High priests would wear turbans and fishing nets when praying for
prosperous fishing seasons; the integration of these two textiles
eventually led to the classic fishnet pattern the Keffiyeh is known for.
Following the [1936 Arab Revolt](1936_Arab_Revolt "wikilink"), the
Keffiyeh became a symbol of political uprising and rebellion. It was not
until the rise of [Arafat](Yasser_Arafat "wikilink") in the 1960s that
the scarf came to symbolize Palestinian solidarity. The scarf has
appeared among many leftist groups and anti-war organizations. The scarf
was appropriated as a fashion accessory in a 2007
[Balenciaga](Balenciaga "wikilink") show. The Keffiyeh is a fashion
staple in the west, although few are aware of its rich political
history.[4] Today, the [Kaflab Foundation](http://www.kaflab.org/) works
with artists and designers to explore and destigmatize Arab heritage and
identity through the Keffiyeh.

## See also

-   [Fashion](Fashion "wikilink")
-   [Activism](Activism "wikilink")
-   [Muslim ban](Muslim_ban_(disambiguation) "wikilink")

[5] [6] [7] [8] [9]

## References

[Category:Activism](Category:Activism "wikilink")
[Category:Fashion](Category:Fashion "wikilink")

[1] Bourne, L. (2014, September 22). A History of the Miniskirt: How
Fashion’s Most Daring Hemline Came To Be. Retrieved July 14, 2017, from
<http://stylecaster.com/history-of-the-miniskirt/>

[2] Parks, C. (2015, March 23). The Miniskirt: An Evolution From The
'60s To Now. Retrieved July 14, 2017, from
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/23/mini-skirt-evolution_n_6894040.html>

[3] Interview with Ethical Designer Katharine Hamnett. (2013, November
21). Retrieved July 14, 2017, from
<http://www.thefashionspot.com/runway-news/351665-katharine-hamnett-interview/>

[4] Kim, K. (2007, February 10). Where Some See Fashion, Others See
Politics. Retrieved July 14, 2017, from
<https://www.nytimes.com/2007/02/11/fashion/shows/11KAFFIYEH.html>

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]