---
title: Unisex
permalink: /Unisex/
---

**Unisex** is a mode of dress that makes the wearer look similar
regardless of gender, and in some cases, genderless in the style of
androgyny.

## Origin

The term unisex was first used in 1968 in *Life*, an American magazine
that ran weekly from 1883 to 1972. Although the first use of "unisex" as
a term dates from the 1960s, it can be argued that "unisex clothing" its
first appearance dates from the late nineteenth century, as part of the
"Victorian dress reform". It can be argued that in the nineteenth
century fashionable clothing, which originated in France, reflected the
dominance of traditional feminine roles. John Berger his famous
statement 'men act, women appear' can be useful to further discuss the
appearance of "unisex clothing". Berger claims that, in Western European
cultures, the role of men is considered active and that of women
considered passive or, to put it differently, men observe women and
women are observed by men. This asymmetry in the relationship between
men and women was visualized in dress in the nineteenth century: women
were more and more prescribed to fashionable clothing, clothing that
disabled them to be active due to, for example, crinoline dresses that
were very heavy, whereas men had the ability to be active due to their
sober and simple clothing. An attempt to develop alternative feminine
roles by the use of alternative clothing behavior started in England and
the United States. For example, members of the women's movement deplored
the use of corsets and sets of ponderous garments and centred their
proposals of dress reform on the adoption of trousers. However, they
were unable to win the support of many women outside of their own group
due to the basic premise of nineteenth century ideology concerning
women's roles in which "the belief in fixed gender identities and
enormous differences – physical, psychological, and intellectual –
between men and women" was at centre. One example of this was the
organized "Symposium on Dress" in which three designs, that included
either a divided skirt or trousers, were presented. These dress reform
proposals were, at that time, very controversial and seen as too radical
by the middle-class women, therefore, leaning more towards alienation
than involvement of this potential group of supporters of the women's
rights movement.

## Adoption

A more fruitful account of the recognition of non-conformist costume or
dress of that time lies in the history of "alternative dress". The
alternative dress style can be described as a "set of signs, borrowed
from male clothing, that appeared sometimes singly, sometimes in
combination with one another, but always associated with items of female
clothing." This alternative dress is a form of non-verbal communication
and is different than the "Victorian dress reform" (as mentioned above),
being a form of verbal communication. Bicycling, for example, was a late
nineteenth century sport that was not identified as a male activity.
Women, therefore, were able to wear divided skirts and knee-length
bloomers without having difficulties considering gender roles because
this "alternative dress" did not intend to undermine patriarchy. After a
while, this and many other alternative dress examples, such as uniforms,
became more effective in conveying a message than that of dress
reformers, because alternative dress had more "followers" in everyday
life. The bicycle, therefore, can be seen as 'one of the symbols of
emancipation' that has changed the attitude towards women's sports
apparel.

## Influences

Eventually, the 1960s can be considered the decade in which "unisex" and
"unisex clothing" became widely spread. The "unisex" trend arose in
response to the youth revolution and the hippie movement of the 1960s
and the women's liberation movement of the early 1970s. However, this
trend can be considered a more recent form of the aforementioned
fashionable clothing, because it confirms a traditional feminine role
subservient to the masculine role given the fact that "unisex clothing",
mostly, represents women wearing (altered) men's clothing.

## Examples

Today, a common mode of unisex clothing may be an outfit made up of
shirt, pants, or both, as these articles are considered appropriate for
either gender in western society. Both men and women wear shirt and
pants on regular basis in the western world and it has become quite a
fashion favourite despite feminine style clothing maintaining a secure
place in female fashion. Rad Hourani first unisex gender neutral brand
in fashion history.