---
title: Khata
permalink: /Khata/
---

[thumb\|Blue Khatas tied to a stone stele at the former [Manjusri
Monastery](Manjusri_Monastery "wikilink"),
[Mongolia](/Mongolia "wikilink")\|alt=\|262x262px](/Image:Manzushir_Khiid_149194575_f9e5350702_o.jpg "wikilink")

A **khata or khatag**[1](; , **Dhar**, Mongolian : / / , **khadag** or
hatag, *khada*, Chinese /; [pinyin](/pinyin "wikilink"):
****/****[2][3][4]) is a traditional ceremonial
[scarf](/scarf "wikilink") in [tengrism](/tengrism "wikilink")[5] and
[Tibetan Buddhism](/Tibetan_Buddhism "wikilink"). and is common in
cultures and countries where Tibetan Buddhism is practiced or has strong
influence.

The khata symbolizes purity and compassion and is worn or presented with
incense at many ceremonial occasions, including births, weddings,
funerals, graduations and the arrival or departure of guests. It is
usually made of [silk](/silk "wikilink"). Tibetan khatas are usually
[white](/white "wikilink"), symbolising the pure heart of the
giver,[6][7] though it is quite common to find yellow-gold khata as
well. [Tibetan](/Tibet "wikilink"), [Nepali](/Nepal "wikilink"), and
[Bhutanese](/Bhutan "wikilink") khatas feature the
[ashtamangala](/ashtamangala "wikilink"). There are also special
multi-colored khatas. [Mongolian](/Mongolia "wikilink") khatas are
usually blue, symbolizing the blue sky. In Mongolia, khatas are also
often tied to [ovoos](/ovoo "wikilink"), [stupas](/stupa "wikilink"), or
special trees and rocks. [left\|thumb\|13th Dalai Lama of Tibet in
1932](/File:13th_Dalai_Lama_in_1932.jpg "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Tibetan clothing](/Category:Tibetan_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Scarves](/Category:Scarves "wikilink") [Category:Buddhist
ritual implements](/Category:Buddhist_ritual_implements "wikilink")
[Category:Buddhist symbols](/Category:Buddhist_symbols "wikilink")
[Category:Tibetan Buddhist art and
culture](/Category:Tibetan_Buddhist_art_and_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Tibetan Buddhist ritual
implements](/Category:Tibetan_Buddhist_ritual_implements "wikilink")
[Category:History of Asian
clothing](/Category:History_of_Asian_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4] <http://dict.revised.moe.edu.tw/cgi-bin/cbdic/gsweb.cgi?o=dcbdic&searchid=Z00000079118>

[5]

[6]

[7]