---
title: Khăn rằn
permalink: /Khăn_rằn/
---

[thumb\|right\|A museum exhibition shows women wearing the
characteristic black-and-white checkered *khăn rằn* headscarf and black
*[áo bà ba](áo_bà_ba "wikilink")*
tunic](/File:Female_Guards_-_Cu_Chi_Tunnels_-_VIetnam.JPG "wikilink")
The ***khăn rằn*** ([khăn](/:wikt:khăn "wikilink") "towel, scarf"
[rằn](/:wikt:rằn "wikilink") "striped") is a traditional checkered black
and white shawl, derived from the Khmer *[krama](/krama "wikilink")* and
worn in the region of [Mekong Delta](/Mekong_Delta "wikilink") in
Vietnam.[1]

During the [Vietnam War](/Vietnam_War "wikilink"), the distinctive scarf
was donned by the [Khmer Rouge](/Khmer_Rouge "wikilink") and [Viet
Cong](/Viet_Cong "wikilink") soldiers to identify themselves.[2][3]

## References

[Category:Vietnamese clothing](/Category:Vietnamese_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Vietnamese words and
phrases](/Category:Vietnamese_words_and_phrases "wikilink")
[Category:Scarves](/Category:Scarves "wikilink") [Category:People's Army
of Vietnam](/Category:People's_Army_of_Vietnam "wikilink")

[1] *The girl in the picture: the story of [Kim
Phuc](/Kim_Phuc "wikilink")* Denise Chong - 2000 "Sometimes, all she
caught by the light of her lamp was a checkered, black-and-white scarf,
the trademark khan ran worn by the southern revolutionary."

[2] Stanley I. Kutler (1996) *Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War* "Note the
black-and-white checked scarf in the background, an identifying symbol
of the Viet Cong guerrilla"

[3] <http://www.vietnam-surplus.com/vietcong-scarf.html>