---
title: Chonga
permalink: /Chonga/
---

[thumb\|A Chonga style look seen in Oregon,
2011.](/File:BellaCongaStyle2011.jpg "wikilink") **Chonga** is a
Spanish-derived term used especially in [South
Florida](/South_Florida_metropolitan_area "wikilink"), often to indicate
a working-class, sexually liberated, aggressive, and emotionally
expressive young woman.

Chongas are also a distinct [subculture](/subculture "wikilink"),
believed to have developed in [Miami](/Miami "wikilink") in the late
20th century. Members are typically young, working-class Hispanic women.
In South Florida the term is usually considered a pejorative, though
some young women are proud to identify themselves as such. While
feminist scholarship on chongas is limited, early work by [gender
studies](/gender_studies "wikilink") scholar Jillian Hernandez has
suggested that the chonga identity is an "emerging
[icon](/icon "wikilink")", and that it can be empowering for
working-class women.

## Etymology and meaning

The intended meaning of the term "chonga" varies depending on the
context in which it is used. The most specific meaning of the term
denotes a member of the chonga subculture—young, usually working class
and Latina women—who dress and often act in a sexualized, brash,
sometimes aggressive manner. The term also has three looser meanings: as
a synonym for prostitute; to refer to a woman who acts "gangsta" or in a
thug like manner; and among female friends, as a jovial way to greet
each other, as an alternative to "girlfriend!"[1][2]

Usage of the term to refer to young women is believed to have arisen in
[Miami](/Miami "wikilink"), and only became prominent in the early 21st
century. The same word has long been used in Latin American countries
such as [Peru](/Peru "wikilink") and [Ecuador](/Ecuador "wikilink") to
refer to a brothel; the modern US usage of the word may be related to
this, or might have arisen independently among Floridian
Cuban-Americans.

"Chonga" has lexical similarities with several other Spanish terms, some
of which have been in use for centuries.[3][4] These include:

-   *[chola](/Cholo "wikilink")* - used in the [Southwestern United
    States](/Southwestern_United_States "wikilink") for women of
    [Mexican](/Mexican_people "wikilink") or
    [Mexican-American](/Mexican_American "wikilink") descent, sometimes
    with the added meaning that they are a "homegirl" or someone from
    the streets.[5]
-   *chula* - which denotes a cute or sexy young woman, whereas chulo is
    the male equivalent.[6]
-   *chusma* - literally meaning snitch or gossiper, but can also denote
    a woman of low standing. That is to say, a Chusma or a Chula can be
    nouns to describe a chonga, but the three are not the same nor
    opposites. Example: "That chonga is such a chusma, she called the
    cops on Papi Chulo."

## Chonga subculture

According to the journalist Tamara Lush, Chonga subculture may have
first appeared in [Miami](/Miami "wikilink") during the 1980s. Early
chongas were usually Cuban teenagers whose parents had recently
immigrated to the US. In the 1990s, chongas often wore white shorts with
a colored thong underneath, basketball jerseys, and fake gold jewelry.
Over the years the style evolved, with for instance tight jeans becoming
more popular than shorts.[7]

### Chonga characteristics

21st-century chongas will often exhibit at least some of the following
characteristics:

-   Cheap but sexy clothing, which often includes "Brazilian jeans"[8]
    and revealing tops, a preference for gelled hair, synthetic nails
    and gaudy jewelry, often including fake gold, bangles and earring
    hoops.[9]
-   Sexual availability, often along with a preference to be surrounded
    by men.
-   Hostility to other young women, unless they are fellow members of
    the same chonga crew.
-   Loud, emotionally expressive and aggressive behavior.[10][11]

Not all chongas live up to these stereotypes; for example, sometimes
women whose conduct is the most overtly sexualized will in fact be among
the least interested in actual heterosexual encounters—in some cases
chonga behavior is perhaps best understood as a kind of bonding between
female friends.[12]

### Depictions in the media

Until 2007, chongas have rarely appeared in the media, despite their
high visibility in real life. One of the rare exceptions was the
*Cheerleaders* (2000) set of art photographs by [Luis
Gispert](/Luis_Gispert "wikilink").[13][14] In popular culture, the few
exceptions include [Bratz](/Bratz "wikilink") dolls which have a
chonga-like appearance; the chonga-like characters Lydia and Melina in
the television comedy [MADtv](/MADtv "wikilink"); and the chonga-like
character Tina in the movie *[Do the Right
Thing](/Do_the_Right_Thing "wikilink")*.[15][16] Chongas became
considerably more common in popular culture after the 2007 release of
[Chongalicious](/Chongalicious "wikilink"), a YouTube [viral
video](/viral_video "wikilink"). Hernandez noted that the only depiction
she's aware of that accurately showed chongas in their social context
was the 2007 "Bratz girls" exhibition by the *GisMo Collective* (Jessica
Gispert and Crystal Molinary).[17]

### In cultural and gender studies

According to a 2009 article by gender studies scholar Jillian Hernandez,
feminist literature covering chongas remains sparse, even after their
profile was raised by the *Chongalicious* video. Hernandez contrasts
this with the extensive body of work on [Chicana
feminism](/Chicana_feminism "wikilink"), which explores the *chola* and
*chusma* phenomena.[18] Hernandez argues the chonga image has become
iconic in Miami, and states that the aesthetic appeal of the chonga can
be considerable, which in her opinion partly explains why the
*cheerleaders* set of photographs was successful in launching Gispert's
international career.[19]

The portrayal of chongas in the media can, however, be problematic,
sometimes even repressive, as powerful negative images contribute to
Latinas internalizing pressure to conform which originates from the
dominant Anglo-American culture.[20] Stereotypical representations of
chongas can play a role in the United States' wider [culture
wars](/culture_wars#United_States_of_America "wikilink"), adding to
concerns about the sexuality of some Latina women being "out of control"
with their perceived high rate of reproduction.[21] Citing earlier work
by Isabel Molina Guzmán,[22] Hernandez relates this to the [Elián
González affair](/Elián_González_affair "wikilink"), where the media
portrayal of Marisleysis González as having the chonga-like
characteristic of emotional excess contributed to the degradation of the
privileged, "model minority status" that [Cuban
Americans](/Cuban_Americans "wikilink") had previously enjoyed.[23]

In her own research, Hernandez found that most people she questioned
considered "chonga" a pejorative term. One respondent even went as far
as to say the term sums up all the negative Latina stereotypes. A few
asserted that while they know several chongas, they don't know any who
self-identify as such. Sometimes Latina women will admit they went
through a brief "chonga" phase in their early teens, but later came to
view the style as uncool. Yet some chongas chose to retain the identity
into their twenties. Hernandez also found that some young woman are
proud to call themselves chongas. Several expressed pride in their
sexual attractiveness. The creators of "Chongalicious", who are
themselves middle class, found they had considerably more male attention
while pretending to be chongas, one of them saying back in 2007 that "I
think we would have boyfriends if we were real chongas."[24] Hernandez
suggests that the chonga sub culture is in several ways a positive
thing, representing women who are not shamed into invisibility by their
low-class status or ethnic identity. She anticipates a broadening and
deepening of feminist scholarship on chongas, to uncover the ways in
which the chonga identity can be helpful to young women exploring their
"bodies and pleasures".[25][26]

## See also

-   [Chicano Movement](/Chicano_Movement "wikilink")
-   [Ghetto fabulous](/Ghetto_fabulous "wikilink")
-   [List of subcultures](/List_of_subcultures "wikilink")

## Footnotes

## Citations

## References

-

-

-

-

-

## Further reading

-

-

-

-

-

-

## External links

-   [I love Chongas](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mBVP4E2Cuk8) -
    Chonga appreciation song.
-   [The Real Chonga
    okaaay](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mLzU0W2vWsY) - one of
    several YouTube videos gently making fun of Chongas.

[Category:Culture of Miami](/Category:Culture_of_Miami "wikilink")
[Category:Gender studies](/Category:Gender_studies "wikilink")
[Category:Hispanic and Latino American culture in
Florida](/Category:Hispanic_and_Latino_American_culture_in_Florida "wikilink")
[Category:Hispanic and Latino American
women](/Category:Hispanic_and_Latino_American_women "wikilink")
[Category:Hispanic and Latino American working
class](/Category:Hispanic_and_Latino_American_working_class "wikilink")
[Category:Mexican-American culture in
Florida](/Category:Mexican-American_culture_in_Florida "wikilink")
[Category:Cuban-American culture in
Florida](/Category:Cuban-American_culture_in_Florida "wikilink")
[Category:Stereotypes of working-class
women](/Category:Stereotypes_of_working-class_women "wikilink")
[Category:Working-class culture in the United
States](/Category:Working-class_culture_in_the_United_States "wikilink")
[Category:Subcultures in the United
States](/Category:Subcultures_in_the_United_States "wikilink")

[1] Hernandez 68.

[2] Lush 2007.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] Pocketless [Skinny jeans](/Skinny_jeans "wikilink") that usually
have an accentuating effect on the bottom.

[9] Chongas sometimes like to have their names written on the hoops.

[10]

[11] Hernandez *passim*, and esp. 85.

[12] Hernandez 85.

[13] Hernandez 77-79.

[14] [The cheerleader set of images on Gispert's web
site](http://www.luisgispert.com/index.php#mi=2&pt=1&pi=10000&s=16&p=1&a=0&at=0).
Not all pics feature chonga-like lasses; for an iconic image discussed
at length in Hernandez, see pic no. 15. See also pic nos. 3, 9, 16 & 17.

[15]

[16] Hernandez 65.

[17] Hernandez 68, 79-86.

[18] Hernandez 86-87.

[19] Hernandez 80.

[20] Guzmán 2004.

[21] Gutiérrez ch. 7.

[22] *Disorderly Bodies and Discourses of Latinidad in the Elián
González Story*, Isabel Molina Guzmán (2007)

[23] Hernandez 66.

[24]

[25] Hernandez notes that she is consciously echoing [Michel
Foucault](/Michel_Foucault "wikilink") in using the term "bodies and
pleasures", as she sees it as a more empowering alternative to
"sexuality".

[26] Hernandez *passim*, esp. 86-87.