---
title: Armscye
permalink: /Armscye/
---

In [sewing](/sewing "wikilink"), the **armscye** is the armhole, the
fabric edge to which the [sleeve](/sleeve "wikilink") is sewn. The
length of the armscye is the total length of this edge; the width is the
distance across the hole at the widest point.

## Etymology

Multiple theories for the etymology of "armscye" have been proposed.

The scholarly [etymology](/etymology "wikilink") has the origin as "arm"
+ "scye." The first documented use of "scye" in print is by Jamieson
(1825) Suppl.: "sey," a [Scots](/Scots_Language "wikilink") and Ulster
dialect word (written also scy, sci, si, sie, sy in glossaries) meaning
‘the opening of a gown, etc., into which the sleeve is inserted;[1][2]
the part of the dress between the armpit and the chest (of obscure
etymology, and sometimes confused with "scythe" due to similarly curved
shapes).

A more fanciful folk etymology is as follows. Because the expression
"arm's eye" was used in some older sewing texts (e.g. "Gynametry,"
published in 1887[3]) it is conjectured that in poor prints the
apostrophe and the crossbar of the lower case "e" were indistinct, and
the [neologism](/neologism "wikilink") "armscye" was created by readers
who [concatenated](/concatenated "wikilink") the orphaned fragments
"arm" and "s" with the corrupt "cye". According to this undocumented
theory, until the beginning of the 20th century writers favoured the
original term or at least a more logical variation (e.g. "armeye" in
*The Perfect Dressmaking System,* published in 1914[4]), but as
self-proclaimed experts copied each other, the term "armscye" eventually
became widely enough used by home sewers to gain general acceptance.

The latter theory clearly contradicts evidence (discussed above) that
the term "scye" was already in use at least as early as 1825. Therefore,
the erroneous folk analysis was not in the direction from "arm's eye" to
"armcye", but rather from the original "armcye" to "arm's eye" (which
made more sense to [modern English](/modern_English "wikilink")
speakers, with a later adjustment more recently back to the correct
"armscye").

## References

-   [Armscye & Armhole measurement in
    sewing](https://sewguide.com/armscye-armhole-measurement/)

## Further reading

-   [Dolman](/Dolman "wikilink")

-   — Wilson discusses the sizes and shapes of armscyes.

[Category:Sewing](/Category:Sewing "wikilink")
[Category:Sleeves](/Category:Sleeves "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]