---
title: Clerical collar
permalink: /Clerical_collar/
---

[thumb\|[Church of Sweden](Church_of_Sweden "wikilink") Lutheran priest
wearing a clerical shirt with a tab
collar.](/File:Sven-erik_brodd.jpg "wikilink") A **clerical collar**,
**clergy collar**, or **Roman collar**, is an item of
[Christian](/Christianity "wikilink") [clerical
clothing](/clerical_clothing "wikilink").[1] The collar closes at the
back of the [neck](/neck "wikilink"), presenting a seamless front. The
shirt may have the collar built in. The clerical collar is almost always
white and was originally made of cotton or linen but is now frequently
made of plastic. Sometimes it is attached with a *collaret* or
*collarino* that covers the white collar almost completely, except for a
small white square at the base of the throat, and sometimes with the top
edge of the collar exposed to mimic the collar of a
[cassock](/cassock "wikilink"). It may simply be a detachable tab of
white in the front of the clerical shirt. The clerical shirt is
traditionally black (or another color appropriate to a person's ministry
rank, such as purple for Anglican bishops), but today is available in a
variety of colors depending on the wearer's preference. Once the
clerical collar is removed the garment is indistinguishable from any
other shirt. When clergy are delivering sermons, they sometimes attach
[preaching bands](/preaching_bands "wikilink") to their clerical collar.

## History

According to the [Church of England](/Church_of_England "wikilink")'s
Enquiry Centre (citing the *[Glasgow
Herald](/Glasgow_Herald "wikilink")* of December 6, 1894),[2] the
detachable clerical collar was invented in 1865 by the Rev. Donald
Mcleod, a [Church of Scotland](/Church_of_Scotland "wikilink")
(Presbyterian) minister in [Glasgow](/Glasgow "wikilink").[3][4][5]

By 1840, [Anglican](/Anglican "wikilink") clergy developed a sense of
separation between themselves and the secular world.[6] One outward
symbol of this was the adoption of distinctive clerical dress.[7] This
had started with the black coat and white necktie which had been worn
for some decades.[8] By the 1880s this had been transmuted into the
clerical collar, which was worn almost constantly by the majority of
clergy for the rest of the period.[9]

Henry McCloud stated that the collar "was nothing else than the shirt
collar turned down over the cleric's everyday common dress in compliance
with a fashion that began toward the end of the sixteenth century. For
when the laity began to turn down their collars, the clergy also took up
the mode."[10] Invented in the [Presbyterian
Church](/Presbyterian_Church "wikilink"), the clerical collar was
adopted by other [Christian
denominations](/Christian_denominations "wikilink"), including the
[Catholic Church](/Catholic_Church "wikilink"), [Anglican
Church](/Anglican_Church "wikilink"), [Methodist
churches](/Methodism "wikilink"), [Eastern Orthodox
Church](/Eastern_Orthodox_Church "wikilink"),
[Baptist](/Baptist "wikilink") churches and the
[Lutheran](/Lutheranism "wikilink") churches.[11][12] Prior to the
[Second Vatican Council](/Second_Vatican_Council "wikilink") (1962–1965)
the practice of Catholic clergy wearing the clerical collar as
street-dress tended to be found only in those countries where
[Catholicism](/Catholicism "wikilink") was the minority religion. It was
mandatory for U.S. Catholic priests starting in 1884.[13] In the 1960s,
many clergy who lived in countries where Catholicism was the dominant
religion also began to wear the clerical collar rather than the
[soutane](/soutane "wikilink") or [cassock](/cassock "wikilink").

In the [Reformed](/Reformed "wikilink") tradition, which stresses
preaching as a central concern, [pastors](/pastors "wikilink") often don
[preaching tabs](/preaching_tabs "wikilink"), which project from their
clerical collar.[14] Preaching bands (an alternative name for tabs) are
also worn by Anglican clergy, particularly on occasions such as
[inductions](/Canonical_provision "wikilink") when choir dress of
[cassock](/cassock "wikilink"), [surplice](/surplice "wikilink"),
[preaching scarf](/preaching_scarf "wikilink") and the [academic
hood](/academic_hood "wikilink") pertaining to degree is worn, as well
as at [Mattins](/Mattins "wikilink") and
[Evensong](/Evensong "wikilink"). Methodist and Lutheran clergy also
sometimes attach preaching bands to their clerical collars.

## Use by denomination

[thumb\|right\|A plastic clerical
collar](/Image:Plastic_roman_collar.JPG "wikilink")

In the Catholic Church, the clerical collar is worn by all ranks of
clergy, thus: bishops, priests, and deacons, and often by
[seminarians](/seminarian "wikilink") who have been admitted to
candidacy for the [priesthood](/priesthood "wikilink") as well as with
their cassock during liturgical celebrations.

Among the [Eastern Catholic
Churches](/Eastern_Catholic_Churches "wikilink") and Eastern Orthodox
Church a band collarette with no "notch" in front may be worn by
seminarians, although the norm is still a standard clerical collar.
However, as the cassock is more commonly, if not mandatorily, worn to
classes, often a plain white shirt will suffice, or a band collar with
no collarette. Slavic cassocks button to the side, and thus a collar is
often pointless, whereas a Greek cassock buttons to the front and has a
higher collar, so the collar prevents chafing—as was its original
function under a cassock. Eastern deacons and sometimes
[subdeacons](/subdeacon "wikilink"), but rarely
[readers](/reader_(liturgy) "wikilink") or other minor clerics, also
wear a clerical collar, with subdeacons and readers often having a style
with no notch, or a tab shirt with no tab. Most Orthodox clerics do not
wear a clerical collar; those who do are usually to be found in Western
Europe or North America.

Collars are typically worn by clergy of other groups such as those of
the Anglican, Methodist, Presbyterian and Lutheran traditions, although
many Scandinavian Lutheran clergy wear the
[ruff](/Ruff_(clothing) "wikilink") instead.[15] Also many
[Pentecostal](/Pentecostal "wikilink") and [non-denominational
Protestants](/Non-denominational_Christianity "wikilink"), and others
wear collars. In the Roman Catholic tradition, major seminarians, after
receiving admission to candidacy (and thus becoming "candidates" for
ordination), often wear clericals in the seminary or their dioceses.

In the United Kingdom (and other British-influenced countries, such as
Canada), clerical collars have been informally referred to as "[dog
collars](/dog_collar "wikilink")"[16] since the mid-nineteenth
century.[17] The term *Roman collar* is equivalent to "clerical collar"
and does not necessarily mean that the wearer is Roman Catholic.[18]

In the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century,
non-Christian clergy, such as some Jewish rabbis in England (such as
Rabbi Abraham Cohen, the editor of the Soncino Books of the Bible) would
also wear clerical collars.

During the 1950s the Reverend [Alec Vidler](/Alec_Vidler "wikilink")
began to advocate the abolition of the clerical collar in favour of a
black shirt and white tie, but whilst some clergy adopted this mode of
dress it did not become widespread.[19]

Members of religious orders will often wear a "Brother's Collar" or
"Brothers Collarette" which is very similar to a typical clerical
collar, but revealing a noticeably smaller amount of the white band.

Some [Unitarian Universalist](/Unitarian_Universalist "wikilink")
ministers choose to wear a clerical collar along with a
[stole](/stole_(vestment) "wikilink").

<File:A>. Gustaf Mattsson 1901.jpg\|1901 portrait of Lutheran pastor
wearing a clerical collar with preaching bands <File:Chaplain> (3rd
Class) The Reverend Walter Charles Wilks (6279211137).jpg\|An Anglican
[military chaplain](/military_chaplain "wikilink") wearing a "dog
collar" during [World War I](/World_War_I "wikilink") <File:Christina>
Lövestam.jpg\|Christina Lövestam, a Lutheran priest in the Church of
Sweden <File:Clericalcollar1.jpg%7CA> Roman Catholic seminarian wearing
a cassock with a clerical collar <File:Col> et collet.jpg\|Illustration
of a detached clerical collar <File:Per> Hansson portrait.jpg\|Per
Henrik Hansson, a Lutheran priest in the Church of Sweden
<File:Rabbi_Dr._Abraham_Cohen.png%7CRabbi> Dr. [Abraham
Cohen](/Abraham_Cohen_(editor) "wikilink"), editor of the Soncino Books
of the Bible <File:Mar> Emmanuel Yosip.png\|Bishop [Emmanuel
Yosip](/Emmanuel_Yosip "wikilink") of the [Assyrian Church of the
East](/Assyrian_Church_of_the_East "wikilink")

## Footnotes

<references/>
[Category:Anglican vestments](/Category:Anglican_vestments "wikilink")
[Category:Lutheran vestments](/Category:Lutheran_vestments "wikilink")
[Category:Catholic clerical
clothing](/Category:Catholic_clerical_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Necklines](/Category:Necklines "wikilink")
[Category:Neckwear](/Category:Neckwear "wikilink") [Category:Protestant
vestments](/Category:Protestant_vestments "wikilink")
[Category:Christian clothing](/Category:Christian_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2] Article from *[The Times](/The_Times "wikilink")*, 14 March 2002,
reproduced online at
[SaltForSermons.Org.UK](http://www.saltforsermons.org.uk/sermon-illustrations/topics/clerical-collar/)

[3] Article on Donald McLeod from *Who's Who in Glasgow in 1909*,
reproduced online at [Glasgow Digital
Library](http://gdl.cdlr.strath.ac.uk/eyrwho/eyrwho1230.htm)

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17] *Oxford English Dictionary*, s.v. 'dog-collar'.

[18] [Webster's Dictionary definition of "Roman
collar"](http://www.websters-online-dictionary.org/Ro/Roman+collar.html)

[19]