Most jackets have a variety of **inner pockets**, and two main **outer
pockets**, which are generally either patch pockets, flap pockets, or
jetted pockets. [1]

![](JackePatchPocket.jpg "fig:JackePatchPocket.jpg")\]\]The patch pocket
is, with its single extra piece of cloth sewn directly onto the front of
the jacket, a sporting option, sometimes seen on summer linen suits, or
other informal styles.

![](JacketFlapPocket.jpg "fig:JacketFlapPocket.jpg") jacket\]\]The
jetted flap pocket is standard for hip pockets, with a small strip of
fabric taping the top and bottom of the slit for the pocket. It has a
lined flap of matching fabric covering the top of the pocket, sewn in
along the seam of the jetting. This flap was initially created to
protect the contents of the pocket from any rain, and is therefore
traditionally meant to be tucked in when indoors, leaving the jettings
exposed for show. [2][3][4][5] However, because this fact is now often
ignored and the flap is seen as an accessory that completes the style,
it is commonly left out indoors, even during formal events.

![](JacketJettedPocket.jpg "fig:JacketJettedPocket.jpg")\]\]A jetted
pocket with no flap is most formal. This style is most often on seen on
[formalwear](formalwear "wikilink"), such as a [dinner
jacket](dinner_jacket "wikilink").

In addition to the standard two outer pockets, some suits have a third,
the ticket pocket, usually located just above the right pocket and
roughly half as wide. While this was originally exclusively a feature of
country suits, used for conveniently storing a train ticket, it is now
seen on some town suits. Another country feature also worn sometimes in
cities is a pair of hacking pockets, which are similar to normal ones,
but slanted; this was originally designed to make the pockets easier to
open on horseback while hacking, also called [pleasure
riding](pleasure_riding "wikilink").[6][7]

## Bibliography

-

-

-

-

-

-

## Notes

[Category:Lounge jackets](Category:Lounge_jackets "wikilink")
[Category:Parts of clothing](Category:Parts_of_clothing "wikilink")

[1] The Nu-Way Course in Fashionable Clothes Making (1926). [Lesson
33](http://vintagesewing.info/1920s/26-fcm/fcm-33.html)

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6] Flusser (1985). [ch.
2](http://www.throughtherye.com/flusser/ch2.htm)

[7] Bookster, a manufacturer of tweed jackets, has illustrations of
various features of jackets: