[thumb](file:CollarStay02.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb](file:CollarStay01.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb](file:Metal_Collar_Bones_Tyler&Tyler.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb](file:Adjustable_collar_stay.jpg "wikilink")

A **collar stay**, **collar stick**, **collar tab** ([British
English](British_English "wikilink")), **collar stiffener**, or **collar
stiff** is a [shirt](shirt "wikilink") accessory consisting of a smooth
strip of rigid material, rounded at one end and pointed at the other,
inserted into specially made pockets on the underside of a shirt
[collar](Collar_(clothing) "wikilink") to stabilize the collar's points.
The stays ensure that the collar lies flat against the collarbone,
looking crisp and remaining in the correct place.[1]

Collar stays can be made from a variety of materials, including
[metal](metal "wikilink") (such as [brass](brass "wikilink"), [stainless
steel](stainless_steel "wikilink"), or [sterling
silver](sterling_silver "wikilink")), [horn](horn_(anatomy) "wikilink"),
[baleen](baleen "wikilink"), [mother of
pearl](mother_of_pearl "wikilink"), or [plastic](plastic "wikilink").
Shirts often come with plastic stays that may eventually need to be
replaced if they bend; metal replacements do not have this problem.[2]

Collar stays can be found in [haberdashers](haberdasher "wikilink"),
fabric- and sewing-supply stores and men's clothing stores. They are
manufactured in multiple lengths to fit different collar designs, or may
be designed with a means to adjust the length of the collar stay.[3]

There are many variations to the traditional collar stay. Some metallic
collar stays are sold with a magnet, which is used to hold the stiffened
collar in place against the shirt.[4] A different type of collar stay
discreetly adds a button hook on one end, to help fasten tiny buttons on
dress shirts; e.g. placket, cuffs or button down collars.[5] Adhesive
collar stays can be stuck to the underside of a collar to either add
stiffness or attach the collar points to the shirt.[6]

Collar stays are removed from shirts before dry cleaning or pressing, as
the cleaning process can damage both the shirt and the stays; they are
replaced prior to wearing. Shirts that are press ironed with the collar
stays are vulnerable to damage, as this results in a telltale impression
of the collar stay in the fabric of the collar.[7] Some shirts have
stays which are sewn into the collar and are not removable.

## References

[Category:Neckwear](Category:Neckwear "wikilink") [Category:Parts of
clothing](Category:Parts_of_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2] How To Keep Dress Shirt Collars In Place \|first=Antonio
\|last=Centeno \|work=Real Men Real Style \|accessdate=2014-01-30}}

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]