In humans, the **crotch** is the bottom of the
[pelvis](human_pelvis "wikilink"), the region of the
[body](human_body "wikilink") where the [legs](human_leg "wikilink")
join the [torso](torso "wikilink"), and is often considered to include
the [groin](groin "wikilink") and [genitals](genitals "wikilink").

## Etymology

*Crotch* is derived from *crutch*; it "was first used in 1539 to refer
to a forked stick used as a farm implement."[1] This region of the body
is also described with other terms such as *groin* or the lower ventral
area.[2]

## Depictions in artwork

The human crotch has been depicted in artwork. In Paleolithic art, forms
called [tectiforms](tectiforms "wikilink") or
[quadrilaterals](quadrilaterals "wikilink") have sometimes been
interpreted to be "quick visual guides, reminders to the imagination" of
the female crotch, and typically do not represent the crotch hairs.[3]

Classical marble statues depict females without pubic hair; in contrast
statues of males "show curly pubic hair".[4]

For much of the history of European art - "until the late seventeenth
century" - references to the female crotch were approached from above:
"Art usually expressed the sense of the vulva as a point at the bottom
of the belly rather than as the meeting place at the top of the
thighs."[5]

[Art therapists](Art_therapy "wikilink") have noted "a triangular or
vaginal shaped area in drawings by rape/sexual abuse victims".[6]

## Scope

The semantic field of the term *crotch* is sometimes expanded to include
objects which have a similar shape to the anatomical human crotch.[7]
This may include botanical structures such as the area where tree
branches are joined together[8] or mechanical structures which fork or
branch or where ramification takes place.[9] The term had also been
expanded to include the joining together of asymmetrical surfaces in cue
sports equipment or the corners of flat surfaces usually made of
quarried slate.[10]

## In clothing

In clothing, the crotch is the area of [trousers](trousers "wikilink"),
[shorts](shorts "wikilink"), [leggings](leggings "wikilink") etc. where
the legs join. The bottom of the crotch is an end of the
[inseam](inseam "wikilink"). The crotch-region on smaller garments such
as underwear are sometimes referred to as the *pouch*.[11]
Loosely-fitted or bagginess in the crotch-region is sometimes associated
with a lax, casual and easy-going approach to attires or garbs.[12]

Clothing that is [tight-fitting](Form-fitting_garment "wikilink") in the
crotch is sometimes referred to by slang terms such as a *man bulge*[13]
or *moose knuckle*[14] on men, and a *[camel toe](camel_toe "wikilink")*
on women, especially if the woman's [labia
majora](labia_majora "wikilink") is conspicuous.[15] Prolonged
constrictive pressure of the crotch on the male genitals may increase
the likelihood of detumescing.[16]

## References

[de:Schritt](de:Schritt "wikilink")
[nl:Schaamstreek](nl:Schaamstreek "wikilink")
[ne:जाङ्घ](ne:जाङ्घ "wikilink") [tl:Pundya](tl:Pundya "wikilink")

[Category:Parts of clothing](Category:Parts_of_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Sexual anatomy](Category:Sexual_anatomy "wikilink")

[1] Hodgson, Charles. 2007. [Carnal Knowledge: A Navel Gazer's
Dictionary of Anatomy, Etymology, and
Trivia](https://books.google.com/books?id=IAzfurRydecC&lpg=PA175&dq=crotch%20anatomy&pg=PA175#v=onepage&q=crotch%20anatomy&f=false),
New York: St. Martin's Press. page 175.

[2] Stavros, A. Thomas, and Cindy Rapp. "Dynamic ultrasound of hernias
of the groin and anterior abdominal wall." Ultrasound quarterly 26.3
(2010): 135-169

[3] Guthrie, R. Dale. 2006. [*The Nature of Paleolithic
Art*](https://books.google.com/books?id=3u6JNwMyMCEC&lpg=PA358&dq=crotch%20art&pg=PA358#v=onepage&q=crotch%20art&f=false),
University of Chicago Press pages. 357-358.

[4] Morris, Desmond. 2007. [*The Naked Woman: a study of the female
body*](https://books.google.com/books?id=Wa9zntiEKeAC&lpg=PA196&dq=crotch%20art&pg=PA196#v=onepage&q=crotch%20art&f=false).
Macmillan. page 196.

[5] Hollander, Anne. 1993. [*Seeing Through
Clothes*](https://books.google.com/books?id=CSItqzbG9nIC&lpg=PA220&dq=crotch%20art&pg=PA220#v=onepage&q=crotch%20art&f=false),
University of California Press. page 220.

[6] Coleman, Victoria D. and Phoebe M. Farris-Dufrene. 1996. [*Art
Therapy and Psychotherapy: Blending Two Therapeutic
Approaches*](https://books.google.com/books?id=UKM16MTitEEC&lpg=PA39&dq=crotch%20art%20-%22dr.%20crotch%22&pg=PA39#v=onepage&q=crotch%20art%20-%22dr.%20crotch%22&f=false),
Taylor & Francis. page 39.

[7] Widdowson, Henry G. "Aspects of the relationship between culture and
language." Communication interculturelle et apprentissage des langues.
Triangle 7 (1988).

[8] Shigo, Alex L. "How tree branches are attached to trunks." Canadian
Journal of Botany 63.8 (1985): 1391-1401.

[9] Zhang, L. "Thermal Deformation Modelling Attempt Of A Storage Ring
Vacuum Vessel." Proceedings of EPAC, Vienna, Austria (2000): 2486-2488.

[10] Byrne, Robert. Byrne's new standard book of pool and billiards.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1998.

[11] Davis, Sheena, and Alistair Furnell. Personal Equipment and
Clothing Correction Factors for the Australian Army: A Pilot Survey. No.
DSTO-TR-3044. DEFENCE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ORGANISATION FISHERMANS
BEND (AUSTRALIA) LAND DIV, 2014.

[12] Newcomb, Elizabeth, and Cynthia Istook. "Confronting stereotypes:
apparel fit preferences of Mexican-American women." Journal of Fashion
Marketing and Management: An International Journal 15.4 (2011): 389-411

[13]

[14] Schlosser, Bethanee J., and Ginat W. Mirowski. "Approach to the
patient with vulvovaginal complaints." Dermatologic therapy 23.5 (2010):
438-448.

[15] Alapack, Richard J. "The epiphany of female flesh: A
phenomenological hermeneutic of popular fashion." The Journal of Popular
Culture 42.6 (2009): 977-1003

[16] Dunlap, Knight. "The development and function of clothing." The
Journal of General Psychology 1.1 (1928): 64-78