---
title: Cufflink
permalink: /Cufflink/
---

A **tie pin** (or **tiepin**, also known as a **stick
pin**/**stickpin**) is a neckwear-controlling device, originally worn by
wealthy English gentlemen to secure the folds of their cravats. They
were first popularized at the beginning of the 19th century. Cravats
were made of silk, satin, lace and lightly starched cambric, lawn and
muslin, and stickpins were necessary accoutrements to keep these
expensive fabrics in place and safe. Stickpins commonly used pearls and
other precious gemstones set in gold or other precious metals and were
designed specifically for their owners.

By the 1860s, the English upper middle classes embraced wearing cravats
with a consequently lower quality of materials and designs used in both
the neckwear and in the stickpins used to keep it in place. By the
1870s, Americans had embraced stickpins and designs were mass-produced
which included animal heads, horse shoes, knife and fork motifs, crossed
pipes, wishbones, bugs, flowers, shields and a host of other figural
motifs. By the 1890s, stickpins had crossed gender lines as women began
wearing them with sporting outfits worn for bicycling, boating,
horseback riding, tennis and golf. The Ascot, Four in Hand, Sailor
scarf, cravat bow tie and wrapped scarf all became popular for both men
and women, and all could be set off with an ornamental stickpin. Between
1894 and 1930 many patents were issued covering such issues as prong
setting, ornament attachment, stickpin blanks, safety clutches, guards
and decorations. One patent was for a brooch which could convert the
center medallion to a stickpin. Another concealed a small lead pencil
point attached to the shaft of the pin. Still another included a small
water reservoir behind the ornamental head of the stick pin in which a
flower blossom could be placed. Patent 1,301,568 dated April 22, 1919
was for a luminous stickpin with a star motif disk-like head which held
a small drop of radioactive material.

Gold or silver style safety pins were commonly used as tie and collar
pins from the beginning of the 20th century. Such a safety pin was used
to fasten the tie to the shirt and was an integral part of a man's
clothing or school uniform, being especially useful on formal occasions
or in windy weather. It could now be possibly making a comeback in 2013
as recently illustrated in the fashion section of a British newspaper.
Alternative ways to control unruly ties are available, although an
ordinary safety pin inserted through from behind the shirt can invisibly
secure the tie without damaging its surface.

During the 1920s the use of straight ties made of delicate materials
such as silk became more fashionable and the use of tie clips gained
prominence, replacing the more traditional tie pin.
[Category:Jewelry](/Category:Jewelry "wikilink")
[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")