---
title: Dart
permalink: /Dart/
---

[thumb\|The reverse side of fabric showing where a dart has been taken
in and stitched to tailor the shape of a garment to the
wearer.](/File:Dart_stitched.jpg "wikilink") **Darts** are folds (tucks
coming to a point) and sewn into [fabric](/fabric "wikilink") to take in
ease and provide shape to a [garment](/garment "wikilink"), especially
for a woman's bust. They are used frequently in all sorts of
[clothing](/clothing "wikilink") to tailor the garment to the wearer's
shape, or to make an innovative shape in the garment. Fabric may be
thought of as flat, and a dart has the effect of removing a wedge shaped
piece and pulling the edges of that wedge together to create a shallow
[cone](/cone "wikilink"). This effect can be seen quite easily with a
paper pattern by pulling together the edges of a dart intake as it would
be sewn. Since fabric is generally more flexible than paper the fabric
will shift around the [apex](/Apex_(geometry) "wikilink") of the cone
and form a softer, but still curved, shape. In a garment a dart ends in
a point at a full area of the body.

A dart in a flat pattern has two important properties: its point, the
point in the pattern at which the dart aims or converges, and the
intake, or the amount of fabric taken in or removed. Since the dart can
extend toward any edge of the pattern without affecting fit, the length
of the dart intake at the edge of the fabric is not a good measure of
dart intake. Rather, the angle subtracted from the pattern by the dart
is what determines the dart's intake.

## Manipulating darts in flat patterns

As long as the focal point of a dart and its intake remain the same, a
dart can be rotated around its focal point, or stylized in one of
several ways without affecting the fit of the garment.

### Slash-and-spread dart rotation

An easy way to rotate a dart on a flat pattern is to slice a straight
line from the dart point to another edge of the pattern (the slash). The
two pieces thus created can then be pivoted (spread) at the dart point
to shift the dart to the position of the slash.

### Pin and pivot dart rotation

The pin and pivot dart rotation technique requires tracing a new pattern
from the original. First, the pattern with the dart to be rotated is set
on top of another piece of paper on which the new pattern will be
traced. A pin is pressed into the dart point to hold that point in
place. Then one leg of the original dart and an arbitrary part of the
original pattern is traced onto the paper. This tracing starts from the
one dart leg and continues from there to the new point where the dart
will reach the outside of the pattern piece. The pattern is then rotated
around the pinned dart point until the other dart leg lines up with the
traced dart leg. Tracing can then continue from the same spot on the
original pattern. The pattern is then removed and the new dart legs
drawn between the dart point (marked by the pin hole) and the gap in the
pattern created during rotation.

### Dart equivalents

[Pleats](/Pleats "wikilink") or [gathers](/Gather_(sewing) "wikilink")
in the fabric can be used as for the same purpose as a normal stitched
dart. These are called dart equivalents.[1] Darts can also be worked
into [style lines](/style_line "wikilink").

## Named dart styles

Two kinds of darts are common in blouses for women:

-   Vertical darts—These are sewn from the bottom of the
    [blouse](/blouse "wikilink") to a point generally around the
    [bustline](/bustline "wikilink"). This type of dart may be found in
    the front, rarely in the back of a garment and are used by the
    garment maker to pull in the bottom of the blouse towards the
    wearer's [waist](/waist "wikilink").
-   Bust darts—These are short triangle folds that provide space for
    [breasts](/breasts "wikilink") such that the fabric under the
    breasts isn't hanging, rather is fitting closer to the wearer. There
    are several subtypes of bust line dart:[2]
    -   Center
    -   Waistline
    -   French
    -   Side seam
    -   Armhole
    -   Neckline
    -   Shoulder
    -   T-dart
    -   Inverted T-dart

In the early 1950s, the New York City firm of Evan-Picone pioneered the
use of darts in the [pockets](/pockets "wikilink") of women's clothing.
The darts help keep the pocket open and thus more easily accessed,
reducing the chance of rips or tears.[3]

## See also

-   [Princess seams](/Princess_seams "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Parts of clothing](/Category:Parts_of_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Seams](/Category:Seams "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3] Hays, Constance. "Joseph Picone, 83, a Founder of Line of Women's
Clothing." *New York Times.* June 26, 2001.