**Décolletage** (or **décolleté**, its adjectival form, in current
[French](French_language "wikilink")) is a term used in woman's fashion
referring to the upper part of a woman's [torso](torso "wikilink"),
comprising her neck, shoulders, back and upper chest, that is exposed by
the neckline of her clothing. The term is most commonly used in Western
female fashions and is most commonly applied to a
[neckline](neckline "wikilink") that reveals or emphasizes
[cleavage](Cleavage_(breasts) "wikilink"). Low-cut necklines are a
feature of [ball gowns](ball_gown "wikilink"), [evening
gowns](evening_gown "wikilink"), [leotards](leotard "wikilink"),
[lingerie](lingerie "wikilink") and [swimsuits](swimsuit "wikilink"),
among other fashions. Although décolletage does not itself prescribe the
extent of exposure of a woman's upper chest, the design of a décolleté
garment takes into account current fashions, aesthetics, social norms
and the occasion when a garment will be worn.

Though neckline styles have varied in Western societies and décolletage
may be regarded as [aesthetic](aesthetic "wikilink") and an expression
of [femininity](femininity "wikilink"), in some parts of the world any
décolletage is considered provocative and shocking.

## Etymology

Décolletage is a French word which is derived from *décolleter*, meaning
to reveal the neck.[1] The term was first used in English literature
sometime before 1831.[2] In strict usage, décolletage is the neckline
extending about two handbreadths from the base of the neck down, front
and back.[3]

## History

<img src="COLLECTIE_TROPENMUSEUM_Studioportret_van_een_Javaanse_vrouw_mogelijk_uit_Jogjakarta_TMnr_60027279.jpg" title="fig:COLLECTIE_TROPENMUSEUM_Studioportret_van_een_Javaanse_vrouw_mogelijk_uit_Jogjakarta_TMnr_60027279.jpg" width="230" alt="COLLECTIE_TROPENMUSEUM_Studioportret_van_een_Javaanse_vrouw_mogelijk_uit_Jogjakarta_TMnr_60027279.jpg" />n
woman in traditional [Javanese](Javanese_culture "wikilink") *kemben*,
c. 1900.\]\]

In [Indonesia](Indonesia "wikilink") (especially in
[Java](Javanese_people "wikilink")), a breast cloth known as
*[kemben](kemben "wikilink")* was worn for centuries until the 20th
century. Today, shoulder-exposing gowns still feature in many
[Indonesian rituals](culture_of_Indonesia "wikilink").

Gowns which exposed a woman's neck and top of her chest were very common
and non-controversial in Europe from at least the 11th century until the
Victorian period in the 19th century. Ball or evening gowns especially
featured low square décolletage designed to display and emphasize
cleavage.[4][5] During that long period, low-cut dresses partially
exposing breasts were considered more acceptable than they are today; a
woman's bared legs, ankles, or shoulders were considered more risqué
than exposed breasts.[6]

In 1450, [Agnès Sorel](Agnès_Sorel "wikilink"), mistress to [Charles VII
of France](Charles_VII_of_France "wikilink"), is credited with starting
a fashion when she wore deep low square décolleté gowns with [fully
bared breasts](toplessness "wikilink") in the French court.[7] Other
aristocratic women of the time who were painted with breasts exposed
included [Simonetta Vespucci](Simonetta_Vespucci "wikilink"), whose
[portrait with exposed
breasts](Portrait_of_Simonetta_Vespucci_(Piero_di_Cosimo) "wikilink")
was painted by [Piero di Cosimo](Piero_di_Cosimo "wikilink") in c. 1480.

Based on woodcut prints, a researcher has argued that during the 17th
century, women's fashions with exposed breasts were common in society,
from queens to common prostitutes, and emulated by all classes.[8] [Anne
of Brittany](Anne_of_Brittany "wikilink") has also been painted wearing
a dress with a square neckline. Low square décolleté styles were popular
in England in the 17th century and even [Queen Mary
II](Mary_II_of_England "wikilink") and [Henrietta
Maria](Henrietta_Maria_of_France "wikilink"), wife of [Charles I of
England](Charles_I_of_England "wikilink"), were depicted with fully
bared breasts; and architect [Inigo Jones](Inigo_Jones "wikilink")
designed a [masque](masque "wikilink") costume for Henrietta Maria that
fully revealed both of her breasts.[9][10]

In [aristocratic](aristocracy_(class) "wikilink") and upper-class
circles, the display of breasts was at times regarded as a [status
symbol](status_symbol "wikilink"), as a sign of beauty, wealth or social
position.[11] From the [Renaissance](Renaissance "wikilink") onwards,
the bared breast even invoked associations with nude sculptures of
[classical Greece](Ancient_Greece "wikilink") that were exerting an
influence on art, sculpture, and architecture of the period.[12]

![](Lady_Godina's_rout;_-_or_-_Peeping-Tom_spying_out_Pope-Joan_by_James_Gillray.jpg "fig:Lady_Godina's_rout;_-_or_-_Peeping-Tom_spying_out_Pope-Joan_by_James_Gillray.jpg"),
1796.\]\] After the [French Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink")
décolletage become larger in the front and less in the back.[13] During
the [fashions of the period 1795–1820](1795–1820_in_fashion "wikilink"),
many women wore dresses which bared the bosom and shoulders. [James
Gillray](James_Gillray "wikilink")'s caricature of 1796 shows [Lady
Georgiana Gordon](Lady_Georgiana_Gordon "wikilink") (1781–1853, then
only 14), not yet [Duchess of Bedford](Duchess_of_Bedford "wikilink"),
at a [rout-party](rout-party "wikilink") gambling at a game called
"[Pope Joan](Pope_Joan_(card_game) "wikilink")".[14] She is wearing an
extreme décolletage, as was fashionable.

During the [Victorian](Victorian_morality "wikilink") period, social
attitudes required women to cover their bosom in public. For ordinary
wear, high collars were the norm. Towards the end of the Victorian
period (end of the 19th century), the full collar was the fashion,
though some décolleté dresses were worn on formal occasions. (See [1880s
in fashion](1880s_in_fashion "wikilink").) In 1884, a portrait painting
by [John Singer Sargent](John_Singer_Sargent "wikilink") of
American-born Paris socialite, [Virginie Amélie Avegno
Gautreau](Virginie_Amélie_Avegno_Gautreau "wikilink"), was
criticised[15] when she was depicted in a sleek black dress displaying
what was considered scandalous cleavage and her right shoulder strap
fallen off her shoulder. The controversy was so great that he reworked
the painting to move the shoulder strap from her upper arm to her
shoulder, and Sargent left Paris for London in 1884, his reputation in
tatters. The painting was named "[Portrait of Madame
X](Portrait_of_Madame_X "wikilink")".[16][17]

When it became fashionable, around 1913, for dresses to be worn with
what would now be considered a relatively modest round or V-shaped
neckline, [clergymen](clergymen "wikilink") all over the world became
deeply shocked. In the [German Empire](German_Empire "wikilink"), all of
the [Roman Catholic](Roman_Catholic "wikilink") bishops joined in
issuing a pastoral letter attacking modern fashions.[18] Fashions became
more restrained in terms of décolletage, while exposure of the leg
became more permitted in Western societies, during [World War
I](World_War_I "wikilink") and remained so for nearly half a
century.[19]

In 1953, Hollywood film *[The French Line](The_French_Line "wikilink")*
was found objectionable under the strict [Hays
Code](Hays_Code "wikilink") with some of [Jane
Russell](Jane_Russell "wikilink")'s décolletage gowns being described as
"intentionally designed to give a bosom peep-show effect beyond even
extreme décolletage".[20] But other actresses defied the then standards.
For example, [Gina Lollobrigida](Gina_Lollobrigida "wikilink") raised
eyebrows with her famous low-cut dress in 1960, and other celebrities,
performers and models followed suit, and the public was not far behind.
Low-cut styles of various depths are now common in many situations.

During a short period in 1964, "topless" dress designs appeared at
fashion shows, but those who wore the dresses in public found themselves
arrested on indecency charges.[21]

Low necklines usually result in increased décolletage. In Western and
some other societies, there are differences of opinion as to how much
body, and especially breast, exposure is acceptable in public.[22] What
is considered the appropriate neckline varies by context, and is open to
differences of opinion. In the United States, in two separate incidents
in 2007, [Southwest Airlines](Southwest_Airlines "wikilink") crews asked
travelers to modify their clothing, to wear sweaters, or to leave the
plane because the crew did not consider the amount of cleavage displayed
acceptable.[23] German Chancellor [Angela
Merkel](Angela_Merkel "wikilink") created controversy when she wore a
low-cut [evening gown](evening_gown "wikilink") to the opening of the
[Oslo Opera House](Oslo_Opera_House "wikilink") in 2008.[24] In the
2010s, fashion which covered more of women's bodies became more popular,
including higher or crew-cut necklines.[25]

## See also

-   [Backless dress](Backless_dress "wikilink")
-   [Halterneck](Halterneck "wikilink")
-   [Topless](Topless "wikilink"), the baring of the whole breasts.
-   The [hanbok](hanbok "wikilink") worn by some 19th-century Korean
    mothers include a [jeogori](jeogori "wikilink") jacket so short as
    to bare the breasts.

## References

-   Alison Gernsheim (1981 \[1963\]). *Victorian and Edwardian Fashion.
    A Photographic Survey*. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, Inc.

## Further reading

-   Desmond Morris (1997). *Manwatching. A Field Guide to Human
    Behavior*. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc.

[Category:15th-century
fashion](Category:15th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:16th-century
fashion](Category:16th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
fashion](Category:18th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Breast](Category:Breast "wikilink") [Category:Human
appearance](Category:Human_appearance "wikilink") [Category:Parts of
clothing](Category:Parts_of_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Necklines](Category:Necklines "wikilink")

[1] [The Free
Dictionary](http://www.thefreedictionary.com/d%C3%A9collet%C3%A9)

[2]

[3]

[4] Gernsheim, pp. 25–26, 43, 53, 63.

[5] Desmond Morris (2004). *The Naked Woman. A Study of the Female
Body*, p. 156. New York: Thomas Dunne Books. .

[6]

[7] Monique Canellas-Zimmer (2005). *Histoires de mode*, Les Dossiers
d'Aquitaine. .

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12] Lucy Gent and Nigel Llewellyn, eds. (1990). *Renaissance Bodies:
The Human Figure in English Culture c. 1540–1660*. London: Reaktion
Books.

[13] S. Devadas Pillai (1997). *Indian Sociology through Ghurye, A
Dictionary*, p. 68, Popular Prakashan, .

[14] In Georgian England a "rout" or "rout-party" was a relatively
informal party given by the well-off, to which large numbers of people
were invited. The term covered a variety of styles of event, but they
tended to be basic, and a guest could not count on any music, food,
drink and dancing being available, though any of these might be.

[15] Richard Ormand and Elaine Kilmurray (1980). *Sargent: The Early
Portraits*, New Haven: Yale University Press, p. 114,

[16]

[17] ["Sargent's
Portraits"](http://www.humanitiesweb.org/human.php?s=g&p=a&a=i&ID=424),
an article including a mention of the scandal caused by the portrayal of
cleavage in [John Singer Sargent](John_Singer_Sargent "wikilink")'s
"[Portrait of Madame X](Portrait_of_Madame_X "wikilink")".

[18] Gernsheim, 94.

[19] Kim K.P., Johnson, Susan J. Torntore, and Joanne Bubolz Eicher
(2003). *Fashion foundations*, p. 716, Berg Publishers. .

[20]

[21]

[22] Salmansohn, Karen. "[The Power of
Cleavage](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/karen-salmansohn/the_power_of_cleavage_b_70260.html)".
*The Huffington Post*, October 29, 2007.

[23] NBC News. ["Woman told she was too Hot to
Fly"](https://web.archive.org/web/20131105050201/http://origin.11alive.com/news/local/story.aspx?provider=top&storyid=102968)

[24]

[25]