---
title: Gusset
permalink: /Gusset/
---

[right\|thumb\|upright\|Late medieval shirt with gussets in the seams at
shoulder, underarm, and
[hem](hem "wikilink")](/File:3-piantagione_Taccuino_Sanitatis_Casanatense_4182_shirt..jpg "wikilink")

In sewing, a **gusset** is a triangular or rhomboidal piece of
[fabric](/textiles "wikilink") inserted into a seam to add breadth or
reduce stress from tight-fitting clothing.[1] Gussets were used at the
shoulders, underarms, and hems of traditional
[shirts](/shirt "wikilink") and [chemises](/chemise "wikilink") made of
rectangular lengths of [linen](/linen "wikilink") to shape the garments
to the body.[2][3]

Gussets are used in manufacturing of modern [tights](/tights "wikilink")
and [pantyhose](/pantyhose "wikilink") to add breadth at the crotch
seam. As with other synthetic [underwear](/Undergarment "wikilink"),[4]
these gussets are often made of moisture-wicking breathable fabrics such
as cotton, to keep the genital area dry and ventilated.[5][6][7]

The phrase "don't bust a gusset" (a variation of "don't blow a gasket")
is an admonition to calm down; becoming so enraged and inflated that one
busted a gusset would imply extreme rage and expansion beyond one's
clothing capacity.

Gussets are also used when making three-piece bags, for example in a
[pattern](/pattern "wikilink")[8] [](/pattern "wikilink")for a bag as a
long, wide piece which connects the front piece and back piece. By
becoming the sides and bottom of the bag, the gusset opens the bag up
beyond what simply attaching the front to the back would do. With
reference to the dimension of the gusset, the measurements of a flat
bottom bag may be quoted as LxWxG.[9] Pillows too, are often gusseted,
generally an inch or two. The side panels thicken the pillow, allowing
more stuffing without bulging.

The meaning of gusset has expanded beyond fabric, broadly to denote an
added patch of joining material that provides structural support. For
example, metal gussets are used in bicycle frames to add strength and
rigidity. Gussets may be used in [retort
pouches](/Retort_pouch "wikilink") and other forms of packaging to allow
the package to stand. [Gusset plates](/Gusset_plate "wikilink"), usually
triangular, are often used to join metal plates and can be seen in many
metal framed constructions. Expanding folders or accordion folders also
employ gussets to allow for expansion when containing more than just a
few sheets of paper.

## References

[Category:Sewing](/Category:Sewing "wikilink") [Category:Parts of
clothing](/Category:Parts_of_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2] Burnham, Dorothy, *Cut My Cote*, Royal Ontario Museum, 1973.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6] [US 20030196252](http://www.google.com/patents/US20030196252) , Sara
Blakely, "Two-ply body-smoothing undergarment", issued 2003-10-23

[7] [Prevention Magazine Editors](/Prevention_(magazine) "wikilink"):
*The Doctors Book of Home Remedies, Thousands of Tips and Techniques
Anyone Can Use to Heal Everyday Health Problems.* Bantam, USA 1991, . P.
705, P. 707

[8]

[9] [Ozepac
Catalogue](http://www.ozepac.com/catalog/OzepacCatalogue.pdf)