---
title: Hem
permalink: /Hem/
---

[thumb\|Hem detail with inscriptions, *Saint-John in Crucifixion*,
[Ferrara](Ferrara "wikilink"), by [Vicino da
Ferrara](/Vicino_da_Ferrara "wikilink")
(1469–70).](/File:Saint_Jean_in_Crucifixion_Ferrare_Vicino_da_Ferrara_1469_1470_detail.jpg "wikilink")
A **hem** in [sewing](/sewing "wikilink") is a garment finishing method,
where the edge of a piece of cloth is folded narrowly and sewn to
prevent unravelling of the fabric.

## Methods

[thumb\|A [presser foot](presser_foot "wikilink") on a home sewing
machine includes measurement markings on the plate beneath the foot for
easier hemming. Shown are measurements in fractions of an inch (above)
and in millimetres
(below).](/File:Sewing_machine_foot_seam_measurements.jpg "wikilink")
There are many different styles of hems of varying complexities. The
most common hem folds up a cut edge, folds it up again, and then sew it
down. The style of hemming thus completely encloses the cut edge in
cloth, so that it cannot unravel. Other hem styles use fewer folds. One
of the simplest hems encloses the edge of cloth with a stitch without
any folds at all, using a method called an [overcast
stitch](/overcast_stitch "wikilink"), although an overcast stitch may be
used to finish a folded "plain hem" as well.[1]

There are even hems that do not call for sewing, instead using iron-on
materials, netting, plastic clips, or other fasteners.[2] These
threadless hems are not common, and are often used only on a temporary
basis.

The hem may be sewn down with a line of invisible stitches or [blind
stitch](/blind_stitch "wikilink"), or sewn down by a [sewing
machine](/sewing_machine "wikilink"). The term *hem* is also extended to
other cloth treatments that prevent unraveling. Hems can be serged (see
[serger](/serger "wikilink")), hand rolled and then sewn down with tiny
stitches (still seen as a high-class finish to handkerchiefs), pinked
with [pinking shears](/pinking_shears "wikilink"),
[piped](/Piping_(sewing) "wikilink"), covered with
[binding](/binding_(sewing) "wikilink") (this is known as a [Hong Kong
finish](/Seam_(sewing)#Finishes "wikilink")), or made with many other
inventive treatments.

Most [haute couture](/haute_couture "wikilink") hems are sewn by hand.
Decorative embroidery embellishment is sometimes referred to as a
[hem-stitch](/hem-stitch "wikilink") design.

## Types of hems and hem stitches

Hems of different depths (which includes the [seam
allowance](/seam_allowance "wikilink")) may have a particular style to
achieve, which requires more or less fabric depending upon the style. A
handkerchief-style edge requires a hem allowance of 0.6 cm or a quarter
inch. A typical skirt or pant hem may be 5-7.6 cm.[3] The hem's depth
affects the way the fabric of the finished fabric will drape. Heavier
fabric requires a relatively shorter hem.[4] An interface fabric sewn to
the fabric in the hem has a useful function in some hem styles. A
[bias](/bias_(textile) "wikilink") strip is sometimes used as a hem
interface. This adds fullness to the finished garment and reduce
wrinkling.[5]

The hem stitches that are commonly used for hand-sewn hems include:
[pick stitch](/pick_stitch "wikilink"); [catch
stitch](/Cross_stitches "wikilink") (also called a *herringbone
stitch*); [slip stitch](/slip_stitch "wikilink"); and [blind
stitch](/blind_stitch "wikilink").[6]

Sewing machines can make a stitch that appears nearly invisible by using
a blind-stitch setting and a blind stitch
[foot](/Foot_(sewing) "wikilink"). Blind-stitches are commonly used to
finish hems of [applique](/applique "wikilink") designs on fabric.[7]
Modern sewing machines designed for home use can make many decorative or
functional stitches, so the number of possible hem treatments is large.
These home-use machines can also sew a reasonable facsimile of a
hem-stitch, though the stitches will usually be larger and more visible.

Clothing factories and professional tailors use a "blind hemmer", or
hemming machine, which sews an invisible stitch quickly and accurately.
A blind hemmer sews a chain stitch, using a bent needle, which can be
set precisely enough to actually sew through one and a half thicknesses
of the hemmed fabric. A rolled hem [presser
foot](/presser_foot "wikilink") on a sewing machine[8] enables quick and
easy hemming even by home sewers.

Heavy material with deep hems may be hemmed with what is called a
*dressmaker's hem*​—​an extra line of loose running stitch is added in
the middle of the hem, so that all the weight of the cloth does not hang
from one line of stitching.

<File:5> thread overlock hem.jpg\|A five-thread
[overlock](/Sewing_machine#Overlock "wikilink") hem made with a
[serger](/serger "wikilink") machine. This photo shows the inside of the
garment. On the outside of the garment, this would appear as a [blind
stitch](/blind_stitch "wikilink"). <File:Button> hole stitch.jpg\|A
[buttonhole stitch](/buttonhole_stitch "wikilink") hems the opening
around a button hole. <File:Pick> stitch hem.jpg\|A [pick
stitch](/pick_stitch "wikilink") hem made with thread that matches the
fabric, to appear invisible on the outside of the garment. <File:Plain>
hem.jpg\|A plain hem, folded once and sewn with a [running
stitch](/running_stitch "wikilink").

## Hem repair

[thumb\|Hem repair tape](/File:HemRepairTape.jpg "wikilink") Hem repair
tape is available as an alternative solution to sewing a broken hem. To
affect a fix, the hem repair tape is laid around the inside of the hem.
It is then ironed with a hot iron. The heat causes the tape to bond the
two surfaces together.

## See also

-   [Hemline](/Hemline "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Sewing](/Category:Sewing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]