![](Dress-pinstripe.jpg "fig:Dress-pinstripe.jpg") **Lapels** are the
folded flaps of cloth on the front of a [jacket](jacket "wikilink") or
[coat](coat_(clothing) "wikilink") and are most commonly found on formal
clothing and [suit](suit_(clothes) "wikilink") jackets. Usually they are
formed by folding over the front edges of the jacket or coat and sewing
them to the collar, an extra piece of fabric around the back of the
neck.
![](Flag_of_the_United_Nations_(lapel_model).jpg "fig:Flag_of_the_United_Nations_(lapel_model).jpg")
There are three basic forms of lapels: notched, peaked, and shawl.
Notched lapels, the most common, are usually seen on [business
suits](business_suit "wikilink"), and on more casual jackets like
[blazers](blazer "wikilink") and [sport
coats](sport_coat "wikilink").[1][2] Peaked lapels are more
[formal](Formal_wear "wikilink"), and nearly always used on double
breasted jackets, but also frequently appear on single breasted ones.[3]
Shawl lapels are usually carried by [tuxedos](tuxedo "wikilink") and
[mess jackets](mess_jacket "wikilink").[4]

## Types of lapel

### Notched lapel

![](Notch_lapel.svg "fig:Notch_lapel.svg") The **notched lapel**
(American English), **step lapel** or **step collar** (British English)
is sewn to the collar at an angle, creating a step effect. This is the
standard on [single-breasted](single-breasted "wikilink") suits, and is
used on nearly all [suit](suit_(clothing) "wikilink") jackets,
[blazers](blazer "wikilink"), and [sports
jackets](sports_jacket "wikilink"). The notched lapel double-breasted
jacket is a rare setting.[5] The size of the notch can vary, and a small
notch is called *fishmouth*.[6] This was the first type of lapel to
appear. {{-}}

### Peaked lapel

![](Peak_lapel.svg "fig:Peak_lapel.svg") The **peaked lapel** (American
English), **peak lapel**, or **pointed lapel** (British English), is the
most formal, featuring on [double-breasted](double-breasted "wikilink")
jackets,[7] all formal coats such as a
[tailcoat](tailcoat "wikilink")[8] or [morning
coat](morning_coat "wikilink"), and also commonly with a tuxedo (both
single and double breasted). In the late 1920s and 1930s, the single
breasted peaked lapel jacket was considered a very stylish design. The
feature was carried into day clothing by the increasing popularity of
the peaked [dinner jacket](dinner_jacket "wikilink").[9] The ability to
cut peak lapels properly on a single-breasted suit is one of the most
challenging tailoring tasks, even for very experienced tailors.[10]
{{-}}

### Shawl lapel

![](Shawl_lapel.svg "fig:Shawl_lapel.svg") The **shawl lapel**, **shawl
collar**, or **roll collar** is a continuous curve. Originally seen on
the [Victorian](Victorian_fashion "wikilink") [smoking
jacket](smoking_jacket "wikilink"), it is now most common on the dinner
jacket or tuxedo.[11] This similarly began as informal eveningwear, and
was then made in both more and less formal versions, depending on the
situation in which it was to be used. It is also commonly used on the
[mess jackets](mess_jacket "wikilink"). {{-}}

## Lapel features

![](Lapel_Watch_(USA),_ca._1889_(CH_18497615).jpg "fig:Lapel_Watch_(USA),_ca._1889_(CH_18497615).jpg")
Lapels have a [buttonhole](buttonhole "wikilink") on the left, which is
intended to hold a [boutonnière](boutonnière "wikilink"), a decorative
flower. These are now only commonly seen at more formal events. To hold
the flower properly, a loop is fixed to the back of the lapel. For
symmetry, double breasted suits often have a button hole on each
lapel.[12] A [lapel pin](lapel_pin "wikilink") is also sometimes worn.

The width of the lapel is a widely varying aspect of suits, and has
changed widely over the years.[13] Some designers maintain however that
most stylish lapel width does not change, and that the lapel "should
extend to just a fraction less than the halfway mark between the collar
and shoulder line".[14]

## Origin

![](Young_Nelson.jpg "fig:Young_Nelson.jpg") in a Captain's tailcoat
(1781), exhibiting a long, loosely-folded lapel with many buttons\]\]

The most common style of lapel, the notched lapel, originated in older
types of jacket or coat that buttoned to the neck, by unbuttoning and
turning back the upper part of the closure at an angle indoors or in hot
weather, and then removing the upper buttons. The upper points are
derived from the end corners of the collar. This can be duplicated by
similarly turning back the closure in a modern button-to-the-neck
garment such as an outdoor coat or a
[boilersuit](boilersuit "wikilink"). Sometimes when caught outside in
bad weather in a lapelled jacket and nothing over it, its wearer may
unfold the lapels and hold them that way to temporarily reproduce the
ancestral to-the-neck closure.

As tailcoats evolved rapidly among the wealthy during the [Regency
period](Regency_period "wikilink"), various styles of closure saw
popularity, from fastenings at the top, the middle, or even hanging
open. The turn-down collar popular on earlier garments like the
[frock](frock "wikilink") was succeeded by long lapels folded down to
below the waist (fashionably tightly nipped in). Invariably, there were
long rows of buttons down the front, most of which did not fasten; in
fact even into the late [Victorian era](Victorian_era "wikilink"), all
frock coats had a long row of button holes on the lapel, long since
obsolete. As buttoning styles changed, the loosely folded front of the
coat correspondingly shifted shape, and the *V* then formed by the
meeting of the fold and the collar continues now in the traditional
shape of notched and peaked lapels, both of which originate from that
period.

Once double breasted frock coats were established, lapels were sharply
creased and their form was more static, varying only in details such as
height, since they were buttoned nearly to the neck by the
[Edwardians](Edwardian "wikilink"), then lengthened to the classic
three-button shape, the two-button jacket being a further American
innovation. The other significant change over that period was the use of
the [revers](revers "wikilink") in the construction of the lapel, as the
Victorians used elaborate three-part patterns to cut a fold of cloth
from the lining into the front of the lapel, a universal consideration
of frock coats and dress coats of the period, but abandoned in favor of
the current single-piece lapels at the same time as the switch to
morning coats and lounge suits. Modern lapels are largely identical in
form to their 1930s counterparts.

Some historians of dress such as Bernard Rudofsky have ridiculed the
evolution of jacket lapels into "vastly unnecessary flaps" and
"decorative rudiments",[15] while others have celebrated the
transformation of lapels into "fetishes" as part and parcel of fashion
as expression.[16]

## Lapelless jackets

Though less common among men's suits in the west, other jacket styles
feature no lapels. Jackets with [mandarin
collars](mandarin_collar "wikilink"), also called stand collars, band
collars, or choker collars, include [Nehru
jackets](Nehru_jacket "wikilink") and various military dress uniforms,
such as the [British Army](British_Army_Uniform "wikilink") and [US
Marine Corps](Uniforms_of_the_United_States_Marine_Corps "wikilink").
Turndown collars, also called Prussian collars and ghillie collars, were
once common on military uniforms and on the [Mao
suit](Mao_suit "wikilink").

## Notes

## Bibliography

-

-

-

-

-   Whife, A.A (ed): *The Modern Tailor Outfitter and Clothier*. The
    Caxton Publishing Company Ltd, London, 1951

[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:Suits
(clothing)](Category:Suits_(clothing) "wikilink") [Category:Parts of
clothing](Category:Parts_of_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2] Flusser (2002). p. 83

[3] Flusser (2002). p. 85

[4] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 172

[5]

[6] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 48

[7]

[8] Flusser (2002). p. 234

[9] Flusser (2002). p. 84

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14] Flusser (1985). [ch.
2](http://www.throughtherye.com/flusser/ch2.htm)

[15] Rodofsky(1947). p. 122

[16]