![](Boris_Kustodiev_-_Portrait_of_Fyodor_Chaliapin_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg "fig:Boris_Kustodiev_-_Portrait_of_Fyodor_Chaliapin_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg")
in a fur-lined [coat](coat_(clothing) "wikilink"). Portrait by [Boris
Kustodiyev](Boris_Kustodiyev "wikilink") ([Portrait of Chaliapin
(Kustodiev
painting)](Portrait_of_Chaliapin_(Kustodiev_painting) "wikilink")),
1921.\]\] In [sewing](sewing "wikilink") and
[tailoring](tailor "wikilink"), a **lining** is an inner layer of
[fabric](fabric "wikilink"), [fur](fur "wikilink"), or other material
inserted into [clothing](clothing "wikilink"), [hats](hat "wikilink"),
[luggage](luggage "wikilink"), [curtains](curtain "wikilink"),
[handbags](handbag "wikilink") and similar items.

Linings provide a neat inside finish and conceal
[interfacing](interfacing "wikilink"), padding, the raw edges of
[seams](seam_(sewing) "wikilink"), and other construction details. A
lining reduces the wearing strain on clothing, extending the useful life
of the lined garment. A smooth lining allows a
[coat](coat_(clothing) "wikilink") or [jacket](jacket "wikilink") to
slip on over other clothing easily, and linings add warmth to
cold-weather wear.[1][2]

Linings are typically made of solid colors to coordinate with the
garment [fabric](textile "wikilink"), but patterned and
contrasting-colored linings are also used. Designer [Madeleine
Vionnet](Madeleine_Vionnet "wikilink") introduced the ensemble in which
the coat was lined in the fabric used for the dress worn with it,[3] and
this notion remains a characteristic of the [Chanel](Chanel "wikilink")
suit, which often features a lining and blouse of the same fabric.[4]

In tailoring, home sewing, and [ready-to-wear](ready-to-wear "wikilink")
clothing construction, linings are usually completed as a unit before
being fitted into the garment shell. In [haute
couture](haute_couture "wikilink"), the sleeves and body are usually
lined separately before assembly.[5]

Some specialized types of lining include the following:

## Interlining

This is an additional layer of fabric between the lining and the outer
garment shell. Insulating interlinings for winter garments are usually
sewn to the individual lining pieces before the lining is assembled.[6]

## Partial or half lining

This type lines only the upper back and front of the garment, concealing
the shoulder pads and interfacings,[7] with or without sleeves.

## Zip-in, zip-out, snap-out or button-in lining (sometimes called a "liner")

This is a warm removable lining for a jacket, coat, or
[raincoat](raincoat "wikilink") that is held in place with a
[zipper](zipper "wikilink"), [snap fasteners](snap_fastener "wikilink"),
or [buttons](buttons "wikilink"). Garments with removable linings are
usually lined with a lightweight fabric as well, to provide a neat
finish when the warm lining is not worn.

<File:Bundesarchiv> Bild 183-21752-0005, VEB Leipziger Bekleidungswerke,
preiswerte Trenchcoats.jpg\|[Trench coat](Trench_coat "wikilink") with
snap-out lining, Germany, 1953.
[File:Kameraväska.jpg\|Camera](File:Kameraväska.jpg%7CCamera) bag with
contrasting padded and fitted lining <File:Tailored> sport coat partial
lining.jpg\|Tailored [sport coat](sport_coat "wikilink") with partial
lining

## Notes

## References

-

-

-

[Category:Sewing](Category:Sewing "wikilink")

[1] Editors of Creative Publishing (2005), pp. 24, 106

[2] Shaeffer (2007), p. 176

[3] Brockman (1965), p. 40

[4] Shaeffer (2007), p. 182

[5] Shaeffer (2007), p. 176

[6] Editors of Creative Publishing (2005), p. 111

[7] Editors of Creative Publishing (2005), p. 58