---
title: Pocket
permalink: /Pocket/
---

[right\|thumb\|Patch pocket with [topstitching](topstitch "wikilink")
and [bar tacking](/bar_tack "wikilink") on the back of a pair of blue
jeans.](/File:Jeans_pocket_back.jpg "wikilink") A **pocket** is a
[bag](/bag "wikilink")- or [envelope](/envelope "wikilink")-like
receptacle either fastened to or inserted in an article of
[clothing](/clothing "wikilink") to hold small items. Pockets are also
attached to [luggage](/luggage "wikilink"),
[backpacks](/backpack "wikilink"), and similar items. In older usage, a
pocket was a separate small bag or pouch.

## Origins

[thumb\|left\|255 px\|Pockets hang from belts as 15th-century peasants
thresh [siligo wheat](Wheat "wikilink") in a *[Tacuinum
Sanitatis](/Tacuinum_Sanitatis "wikilink")*](/File:Tacuinum_Sanitatis-threshing.jpg "wikilink")
[thumb\|upright\|18th-century woman's hanging
pocket](/File:Woman's_Pockets_LACMA_M.59.21.1a-b.jpg "wikilink") Ancient
people used leather or cloth pouches to hold valuables.[1]
[Ötzi](/Ötzi "wikilink") (also called the "Iceman"), who lived around
3,300 [BCE](/BCE "wikilink"), had a belt with a pouch sewn to it that
contained a cache of useful items: a scraper, drill, flint flake, bone
awl, and a dried [tinder fungus](/tinder_fungus "wikilink").[2]

In European clothing, fitchets, resembling modern day pockets, appeared
in the 13th century. Vertical slits were cut in the super tunic, which
did not have any side openings, to allow access to purse or keys slung
from the girdle of the tunic.[3] According to historian Rebecca
Unsworth, it was in the late 15th century that pockets became more
noticeable.[4] During the 16th century, pockets increased in popularity
and prevalence.[5]

In slightly later European clothing, pockets began by being hung like
[purses](/Coin_purse "wikilink") from a belt, which could be concealed
beneath a [coat](/Coat_(clothing) "wikilink") or
[jerkin](/jerkin_(garment) "wikilink") to discourage
[pickpocketing](/pickpocketing "wikilink") and reached through a slit in
the outer garment.

In the 17th century, pockets began to be sewn into men's clothing, but
not women's, which continued to be tied on and hidden under the large
skirts popular at the time.[6] This difference between men's and women's
pockets continues today with men's version of clothing of the same size
and type having bigger pockets.[7]

The word appears in [Middle English](/Middle_English "wikilink") as
*pocket*, and is taken from a [Norman](/Norman_language "wikilink")
diminutive of [Old French](/Old_French "wikilink") *poke*, *pouque*,
modern *poche*, cf. [pouch](/Bag "wikilink"). The form "poke" is now
only used in dialect, or in such proverbial sayings as "a pig in a
poke".

Historically, the term "pocket" referred to a pouch worn around the
waist by women in the 17th to 19th centuries, mentioned in the rhyme
*[Lucy Locket](/Lucy_Locket "wikilink")*.[8]

## Types

A watch pocket or fob pocket is a small pocket designed to hold a
[pocket watch](/pocket_watch "wikilink"), sometimes found in men's
[trousers](/trousers "wikilink") and [waistcoats](/waistcoat "wikilink")
and in traditional [blue jeans](/Jeans "wikilink").[9] However, due to
the decline in popularity of pocket watches, these pockets are rarely
used for their original intended purpose.

A besom pocket or slit pocket is a pocket cut into a garment instead of
being sewn on. These pockets often have reinforced
[piping](/Piping_(sewing) "wikilink") along the slit of the pocket,
appearing perhaps as an extra piece of fabric or stitching. Besom
pockets are found on a [tuxedo jacket](/Tuxedo "wikilink") or
[trousers](/trousers "wikilink") and may be accented with a flap or
button closure.

Camp pockets or cargo pockets are pockets which have been sewn to the
outside of the garment. They are usually squared off and are
characterized by seaming.[10][11]

A beer pocket is a small pocket within a jacket or vest sized
specifically for transporting a bottle of [beer](/beer "wikilink"). It
came into fashion in the 1910s in select areas of the [American
midwest](/American_midwest "wikilink"), prior to
[Prohibition](/Prohibition "wikilink"), after which it faded into
relative obscurity before experiencing minor revivals in the 1980s and
early 2000s.

### Examples of pocket designs

In some of the following illustrations, a folded blue handkerchief is
included for illustration purposes:

<File:Patch> pocket.png\|Patch pocket with [pocket
square](/pocket_square "wikilink") <File:Patch> pocket
topstitching.png\|Patch pocket with topstitching <File:Flap>
pocket.png\|Flap pocket <File:Buttoned> flap box pleat
pocket.png\|Buttoned-flap patch pocket with box
[pleat](/pleat "wikilink") <File:Smile> pocket with piping.png\|"Smile"
slit pocket with [piping](/piping_(sewing) "wikilink") and arrowhead
reinforcements, typical of [Western wear](/Western_wear "wikilink")
<File:Bound> pocket.png\|Welt pocket <File:Stand> pocket.png\|Stand or
single-welt pocket
<File:EighteenthCenturyPocketsSwaledaleMuseumReethEngland.jpg%7C18th>
century-style hanging pockets <File:Tailored> flap pocket with
labels.JPG\|Parts of a tailored pocket

## See also

-   [Handbag](/Handbag "wikilink")
-   [Pocket square](/Pocket_square "wikilink")
-   [Wallet](/Wallet "wikilink")

## References

## Further reading

-

-

-   [Different Types of
    Pocket](http://textileapex.blogspot.com/2014/11/different-pocket-types.html)

## External links

-   [BBC - h2g2 - A Very Brief History of the
    Pocket](http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/h2g2/A798159)
-   [18th Century Women's
    Pockets](http://larsdatter.com/18c/pockets.html)
-   [Pockets at the
    V&A](https://web.archive.org/web/20110615180925/http://www.vam.ac.uk/page/p/pockets/)

<!-- -->

-   [A History of Pockets, Victoria and Albert
    Museum](http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/a/history-of-pockets/)

<!-- -->

-   [Pockets of
    History](http://www.vads.ahds.ac.uk/collections/POCKETS.html)

[Category:Parts of clothing](/Category:Parts_of_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]