![](Carolus_-Private_Collection_-_zwarte_tulekant.jpg "fig:Carolus_-Private_Collection_-_zwarte_tulekant.jpg")
**Tulle** ( ) is a lightweight, very fine, stiff netting. It can be made
of various fibres, including [silk](silk "wikilink"),
[nylon](nylon "wikilink"), [polyester](polyester "wikilink") and
[rayon](rayon "wikilink"). Polyester is the most common fibre used for
tulle. Rayon tulle is very rare. Tulle is most commonly used for
[veils](veil "wikilink"), [gowns](gown "wikilink") (particularly wedding
gowns), and [ballet tutus](ballet_tutu "wikilink"). Tulle comes in a
wide array of colors and it is readily available. It can be dyed at home
if it is made from nylon, rayon or silk but not if it's made from
polyester.

The name comes from [Tulle](Tulle "wikilink"), a city in the southern
central region of France. Tulle was well known as a center of
[lace](lace "wikilink") and [silk](silk "wikilink") production in the
18th century, and early tulle netting probably originated in this French
city. Tulle netting certainly appeared earlier in Parisian ballet
costume than in most other nations, suggesting that tulle netting may
have been more readily available there than elsewhere.

One of the most common uses for tulle netting is in garments. Tulle is
often used as an accent, to create a lacy, floating look. Tulle may also
be used in underskirts or petticoats to create a stiff belled shape.
Gowns are often puffed out with the use of several layers of stiff
tulle. Tulle netting is also used to make veils, since it obscures the
features of the face while allowing the wearer to see out.[1]

Decorative ornaments can also be made from tulle netting. It is
frequently used to wrap up party favors and gifts, especially for
weddings and baby showers. Scraps of tulle netting are sometimes used in
quilting and crafts as well, to add texture to a project. Multicolored
tulle netting is often used for this purpose, to create tulle flowers
and other ornamental accents.

## See also

-   [Organza](Organza "wikilink"), a woven [sheer
    fabric](sheer_fabric "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Woven fabrics](Category:Woven_fabrics "wikilink")

[1]