---
title: Vent
permalink: /Vent/
---

A **vent** is a vertical slit rising from the bottom hem of a
[jacket](/jacket "wikilink") or a [skirt](/skirt "wikilink"), generally
to allow for ease of movement.[1]

In the case of jackets, vents were originally a sporting option,
designed to make riding easier, so are traditional on hacking jackets,
formal coats such as a [morning coat](/morning_coat "wikilink"), and,
for reasons of pragmatism, overcoats. Today there are three styles of
vent: the single-vented style (with one vent, either directly at the
center or roughly 3 cm to the right); the ventless style; and the
double-vented style (one vent on each side). Vents are convenient,
particularly when using a pocket or sitting down, to improve the hang of
the jacket, [2] so are now used on most jackets. Ventless jackets are
associated with Italian tailoring, while the double-vented style is
typically British. (This is not the case with all types of jackets. For
instance, [dinner jackets](/dinner_jacket "wikilink") traditionally take
no vents.)

On skirts, vents are particularly associated with [pencil
skirts](/pencil_skirt "wikilink") where they may be necessary for free
movement, but they may also be added for reasons of style, as they have
the effect of exposing more of the legs. The most common style is a
single vent of a suitable length at the back of the skirt, but they may
be located anywhere.

## References

<references/>

[Category:Parts of clothing](/Category:Parts_of_clothing "wikilink")

[1] Bookster, a manufacturer of tweed jackets, has illustrations of
various features of jackets:

[2] Antongiavanni (2006). p. 172