The **Balmoral** (more fully the **Balmoral bonnet** in [Scottish
English](Scottish_English "wikilink") or **Balmoral
[cap](cap "wikilink")** otherwise, and formerly called the **Kilmarnock
bonnet**) is a traditional [Scottish](Scotland "wikilink") hat that can
be worn as part of formal or informal [Highland
dress](Highland_dress "wikilink"). Developed from the earlier [blue
bonnet](blue_bonnet_(hat) "wikilink"), dating to at least the 16th
century, it takes the form of a [knitted](Knitting "wikilink"), soft
[wool](wool "wikilink") cap with a flat crown. It is named after
[Balmoral Castle](Balmoral_Castle "wikilink"), a royal residence in
Scotland. It is an alternative to the similar and related (informal)
[Tam o' Shanter](Tam_o'_Shanter_(cap) "wikilink") cap and the (formal or
informal) [Glengarry](Glengarry "wikilink") bonnet.

## Design

Originally with a voluminous crown, today the bonnet is smaller, made of
finer [cloth](cloth "wikilink"), and tends to be dark blue, black, or
lovat green. Ribbons in, or attached to the back of, the band
(originally used to secure the bonnet tightly) are sometimes worn
hanging from the back of the cap. A regimental or clan badge is worn on
the left-hand side, affixed to a [silk](silk "wikilink") or
[grosgrain](grosgrain "wikilink") ribbon [cockade](cockade "wikilink")
(usually black, white or red), with the bonnet usually worn tilted to
the right to display this emblem. The centre of the crown features a
[toorie](Pom-pon#Toorie "wikilink"), traditionally red. Some versions
have a diced band (usually red and white check) around the circumference
of the lower edge.

## History

As worn by Scottish Highland regiments the [blue
bonnet](blue_bonnet_(hat) "wikilink") gradually developed into a
stiffened felt cylinder, often decorated with an ostrich plume
[hackle](hackle "wikilink") sweeping over the crown from left to right
(as well as flashes of bearskin or painted turkey hackles). In the 19th
century this tall cap evolved into the extravagant full dress [feather
bonnet](feather_bonnet "wikilink") while, as an undress cap, the plainer
form continued in use until the mid-19th century. By then known as the
Kilmarnock bonnet, it was officially replaced by the
[Glengarry](Glengarry "wikilink") bonnet, which had been in use
unofficially since the late eighteenth century and was essentially a
folding version of the cylindrical military cap.

The name "Balmoral" as applied to this traditional headdress appears to
date from the late 19th century and in 1903 a blue bonnet in traditional
style but with a stiffened crown was adopted briefly by some Lowland
regiments as full dress headgear. After the Second World War, while all
other Scottish regiments chose the Glengarry, a soft blue Balmoral was
adopted as full dress headgear by the [Black
Watch](Black_Watch "wikilink") (Royal Highland Regiment) and was worn
with the green no. 1 dress jacket and with khaki no. 2 or service dress.
As part of the amalgamation of the Scottish regiments in 2006, the
military Balmoral was done away with and all battalions of the Royal
Regiment of Scotland now wear the Glengarry.

Use of the Balmoral has been championed by songwriter [Richard
Thompson](Richard_Thompson_(musician) "wikilink"), who uses it on stage,
in addition to its traditional place in Highland dress.

## North American usage

Several Canadian regiments, including the [Nova Scotia
Highlanders](Nova_Scotia_Highlanders "wikilink") and the [Queen's Own
Cameron Highlanders of
Canada](Queen's_Own_Cameron_Highlanders_of_Canada "wikilink") wear the
Balmoral. It has also been recorded as being worn unofficially by
[Confederate soldiers](Confederate_soldiers "wikilink") in the [American
Civil War](American_Civil_War "wikilink").

## Other usage

The [Hong Kong Police](Hong_Kong_Police "wikilink") Band bagpipes
section wears a black and red version.

The Balmoral is widely used as a part of a uniform in [Army
Cadets](Army_Cadet_Force "wikilink") and pipe band. It is also used as
an element of formal highland dress.