A **beret** is a soft, round, flat-crowned [hat](hat "wikilink"),
usually of woven, hand-knitted [wool](wool "wikilink"), crocheted
cotton, wool [felt](felt "wikilink"), or [acrylic
fibre](acrylic_fibre "wikilink").

Mass production of berets began in the 19th century France and Spain,
and the beret remains associated with these countries. Berets are worn
as part of the uniform of many military and police units worldwide, as
well as by other organisations.

## History

[Archaeology](Archaeology "wikilink") and [art
history](art_history "wikilink") indicate that headgear similar to the
modern beret has been worn since the [Bronze Age](Bronze_Age "wikilink")
across [Northern Europe](Northern_Europe "wikilink") and as far south as
ancient [Crete](Crete "wikilink") and [Italy](Italy "wikilink"), where
it was worn by the [Minoans](Minoan_civilization "wikilink"),
[Etruscans](Etruscans "wikilink") and [Romans](Ancient_Rome "wikilink").
Such headgear has been popular among the nobility and artists across
Europe throughout modern history.

The Basque-style beret was the traditional headgear of
[Aragonese](Aragon "wikilink") and [Navarrian](Navarre "wikilink")
shepherds from the [Ansó](Ansó "wikilink") and
[Roncal](Roncal_–_Erronkari "wikilink") valleys of the
[Pyrenees](Pyrenees "wikilink"), a mountain range that divides [Southern
France](Southern_France "wikilink") from northern Spain. The commercial
production of Basque-style berets began in the 17th century in the
[Oloron-Sainte-Marie](Oloron-Sainte-Marie "wikilink") area of Southern
France. Originally a local craft, beret-making became industrialised in
the 19th century. The first factory, Beatex-Laulhere, claims production
records dating back to 1810. By the 1920s, berets were associated with
the [working classes](working_class "wikilink") in a part of France and
Spain and by 1928 more than 20 French factories and some Spanish and
Italian factories produced millions of berets.

In Western fashion, men and women have worn the beret since the 1920s as
sportswear and later as a fashion statement.

[Military berets](Military_beret "wikilink") were first adopted by the
French [Chasseurs Alpins](Chasseurs_Alpins "wikilink") in 1889. After
seeing these during the [First World War](First_World_War "wikilink"),
British General [Hugh Elles](Hugh_Elles "wikilink") proposed the beret
for use by the newly formed [Royal Tank
Regiment](Royal_Tank_Regiment "wikilink"), which needed headgear that
would stay on while climbing in and out of the small hatches of tanks.
They were approved for use by [King George V](George_V "wikilink") in
1924. Another possible origin of the RTR beret is that it was suggested
to [Alec Gatehouse](Alexander_Gatehouse "wikilink") by [Eric
Dorman-Smith](Eric_Dorman-Smith "wikilink"). While the two officers were
serving at [Sandhurst](Royal_Military_College,_Sandhurst "wikilink") in
1924, Gatehouse, who had transferred to the Royal Tank Corps, had been
given the task of designing a practical headgear for the new corps.
Dorman-Smith had toured Spain, including the Basque region, with his
friend [Ernest Hemingway](Ernest_Hemingway "wikilink") during the past
few years, and had acquired a black Basque beret during his travels.

The black RTR beret was made famous by [Field Marshal
Montgomery](Field_Marshal_Montgomery "wikilink") in the [Second World
War](Second_World_War "wikilink").

## Wear

The beret fits snugly around the head, and can be "shaped" in a variety
of ways – in the [Americas](Americas "wikilink") it is commonly worn
pushed to one side. In [Central](Central_America "wikilink") and [South
America](South_America "wikilink"), local custom usually prescribes the
manner of wearing the beret; there is no universal rule and older
gentlemen usually wear it squared on the head, jutting forward. It can
be worn by both men and women.

Military uniform berets feature a headband or sweatband attached to the
wool, made either from leather, silk or cotton ribbon, sometimes with a
[drawstring](drawstring "wikilink") allowing the wearer to tighten the
hat. The drawstrings are, according to custom, either tied and cut off
or tucked in or else left to dangle. The beret is often adorned with a
[cap badge](cap_badge "wikilink"), either in cloth or metal. Some berets
have a piece of [buckram](buckram "wikilink") or other stiffener in the
position where the badge is intended to be worn.

Berets are not usually lined, but many are partially lined with silk or
satin. In military berets, the headband is worn on the outside; military
berets often have external sweatbands of leather,
[pleather](pleather "wikilink") or ribbon. The traditional beret (also
worn by selected military units, such as the
[Belgian](Belgium "wikilink") [Chasseurs
Ardennais](Regiment_of_Ardennian_Rifles "wikilink") or the French
[Chasseurs Alpins](Chasseurs_Alpins "wikilink")), usually has the
"sweatband" folded inwardly. In such a case, these berets have only an
additional inch or so of the same woollen material designed to be folded
inwardly.

Newer beret styles made of [Polar fleece](Polar_fleece "wikilink") are
also popular.

## Variants

### Basque Country

Berets came to be popularised across Europe and other parts of the world
as typical [Basque](Basque_people "wikilink") headgear, as reflected in
their name in several languages (e.g. *béret basque* in French;
*Baskenmütze* in German; *Basco* in Italian; or *baskeri* in Finnish),
while the Basques themselves use the words *txapela* or *boneta*. They
are very popular and common in the [Basque
Country](Basque_Country_(greater_region) "wikilink"). The colours
adopted for folk costumes varied by region and purpose: black and blue
are worn more frequently than red and white, which are usually used at
local festivities. The people of [Aragon](Aragon "wikilink") adopted red
berets while the black beret became the common headgear of workers in
France and Spain.

A big commemorative black beret is the usual trophy in sport or
*[bertso](Bertsolaritza "wikilink")* competitions, including Basque
rural sports, the Basque portions of the [Tour de
France](Tour_de_France "wikilink"), and the [Vuelta Ciclista al Pais
Vasco](Tour_of_the_Basque_Country "wikilink"). It may bear sewn
ornamental references to the achievement or contest.

### France

The [black beret](black_beret "wikilink") was once considered the
national cap of France in [Anglo-Saxon](Anglo-Saxons "wikilink")
countries and is part of the stereotypical image of the [Onion
Johnny](Onion_Johnny "wikilink"). It is no longer as widely worn as it
once was, but it remains a strong sign of local identity in the
southwest of France. When French people want to picture themselves as
"the typical average Frenchman" in France or in a foreign country, they
often use this stereotype from Anglo-Saxon countries. There are today,
three manufacturers in France. Laulhère (who acquired the formerly
oldest manufacturer, Blancq-Olibet, in February 2014 ) has been making
bérets since 1840. Boneteria Auloronesa is a small artisan French beret
manufacturer in the [Béarnese](Béarn "wikilink") town of
[Oloron-Sainte-Marie](Oloron-Sainte-Marie "wikilink"), and Le Béret
Français is another artisan béret maker in the
[Béarnese](Béarn "wikilink") village of [Laàs](Laàs "wikilink"). The
beret still remains a strong symbol of the unique identity of
southwestern France and is worn while celebrating traditional events.

### Spain

In Spain, the beret is usually known as the *boina*, sometimes also as
*bilbaína* or *bilba*. They were once common men's headwear in most of
the country, mainly across the [north](Green_Spain "wikilink") and
[central areas of the country](Central_Meseta "wikilink"), in the
regions of [Castile](Castile_(historical_region) "wikilink") (both north
and [south](Castilla–La_Mancha "wikilink")),
[Aragon](Aragon "wikilink"), [Navarre](Navarre "wikilink"),
[Leonese](León_(historical_region) "wikilink"), the [Basque
Country](Basque_Country_(autonomous_community) "wikilink"), and
[Galicia](Galicia_(Spain) "wikilink"). The first areas to wear it were
the [Basque Country](Basque_Country_(autonomous_community) "wikilink"),
[Navarre](Navarre "wikilink") and Castile, but it spread over most of
Spain during the 19th century.

All over [Spain](Spain "wikilink") it's actually ended up becoming a
[stereotype](stereotype "wikilink") of rural people, often with negative
connotations of boorishness and uncouthness, found in expressions such
as "paleto de boina a rosca" ("a hick wearing a screwed-on boina"),
which has reduced the number of boina wearers even more.

### Scotland

There are several Scottish variants of the beret, notably the *Scottish
bonnet* or *[Bluebonnet](Blue_bonnet_(hat) "wikilink")* (originally
*bonaid* in Gaelic), whose ribbon cockade and feathers identify the
wearer's clan and rank. It's considered a symbol of Scottish patriotism.
Other Scottish types include the
[*tam-o'-shanter*](Tam_o'_Shanter_(cap) "wikilink") (named by [Robert
Burns](Robert_Burns "wikilink") after a character in one of his poems)
and the striped *[Kilmarnock cap](Balmoral_bonnet "wikilink")*, both of
which feature a large [pompom](pompom "wikilink") in the centre.

### Vietnam

The beret was brought into Vietnam during French colonization and was
adopted as male headgear by the [Nung](Nung_people "wikilink"),
[Tay](Tay_people "wikilink") and [Cao Lan](San_Chay "wikilink") people.

## Uses

### As uniform headgear

The beret's practicality has long made it an item of military, police
and other uniform clothing.

Among a few well-known historic examples are the Scottish soldiers, who
wore the blue bonnet in the 17th and 18th centuries, the Volontaires
Cantabres, a French force raised in the Basque country in the 1740s to
the 1760s, who also wore a blue beret, and the Carlist rebels, with
their red berets, in 1830s Spain.

In the 20th Century, royal approval was given for the [Royal Tank
Corps](Royal_Tank_Corps "wikilink") to adopt the black beret in 1924, In
[World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), the [Royal
Dragoons](Royal_Dragoons "wikilink") adopted the grey beret at the end
of 1939, with other mechanised units of the [British
Army](British_Army "wikilink"), such as the [Royal Armoured
Corps](Royal_Armoured_Corps "wikilink") and the [Guards Armoured
Division](Guards_Armoured_Division "wikilink"), adopting the black beret
in 1941. British officer [Bernard
Montgomery](Bernard_Montgomery "wikilink") ("Monty") took to wearing a
black beret given to him by the driver of his command vehicle in 1942,
and it became his trademark.

The [maroon beret](maroon_beret "wikilink") (not to be confused with the
[red beret](red_beret "wikilink")), was officially introduced in July
1942 at the direction of Major-General [Frederick
Browning](Frederick_Browning "wikilink"), commander of the British [1st
Airborne Division](1st_Airborne_Division "wikilink"), and soon became an
international symbol of airborne forces. In the 1950s the U.S. Army's
newly conceived [Special Forces](Special_Forces "wikilink") units began
to wear a green beret as headgear, following the custom of the [British
Royal Marines](British_Royal_Marines "wikilink"), which was officially
adopted in 1961 with such units becoming known as the "[Green
Berets](Green_Berets "wikilink")", and additional specialised forces in
the Army, U.S. Air Force and other services also adopted berets as
distinctive headgear.

### In fashion and culture

The beret is part of the long-standing stereotype of the
[intellectual](intellectual "wikilink"), [film
director](film_director "wikilink"), [artist](artist "wikilink"),
"[hipster](Hipster_(contemporary_subculture) "wikilink")", poet,
[bohemian](bohemian_style "wikilink") and [beatnik](beatnik "wikilink").
The painter [Rembrandt](Rembrandt "wikilink") and the composer [Richard
Wagner](Richard_Wagner "wikilink"), among others, wore berets. In the
United States and Britain, the middle of the 20th century saw an
explosion of berets in women's fashion. In the latter part of the 20th
century, the beret was adopted by the Chinese both as a fashion
statement and for its political undertones. Berets were also worn by
[bebop](bebop "wikilink") and [jazz](jazz "wikilink") musicians like
[Dizzy Gillespie](Dizzy_Gillespie "wikilink"), [Gene
Krupa](Gene_Krupa "wikilink"), [Wardell Gray](Wardell_Gray "wikilink")
and [Thelonious Monk](Thelonious_Monk "wikilink").

### As a revolutionary symbol

*[Guerrillero Heroico](Guerrillero_Heroico "wikilink")*, one of the most
famous photographs of the [Argentine](Argentina "wikilink")
revolutionary [Che Guevara](Che_Guevara "wikilink"), shows him wearing a
black beret with a brass star.

In the 1960s several activist groups adopted the black beret. These
include the [Provisional Irish Republican
Army](Provisional_Irish_Republican_Army "wikilink") (PIRA), the
[ETA](ETA_(separatist_group) "wikilink") (who wore black berets over
hoods in public appearances), the [Black Panther
Party](Black_Panther_Party "wikilink") of the United States, formed in
1966, and the "Black Beret Cadre" (a similar [Black
Power](Black_Power "wikilink") organisation in
[Bermuda](Bermuda "wikilink")). In addition, the [Brown
Berets](Brown_Berets "wikilink") were a [Chicano](Chicano "wikilink")
organisation formed in 1967. The Young Lords Party, a Latino
revolutionary organisation in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s,
also wore berets, as did the [Guardian
Angels](Guardian_Angels "wikilink") unarmed anti-crime citizen patrol
units originated by [Curtis Sliwa](Curtis_Sliwa "wikilink") in [New York
City](New_York_City "wikilink") in the 1970s to patrol the streets and
subways to discourage crime (red berets and matching shirts).

### Rastafarians

Adherents of the [Rastafari movement](Rastafari_movement "wikilink")
often wear a very large knitted or crocheted black beret with red, gold
and green circles atop their [dreadlocks](dreadlocks "wikilink"). The
style is often erroneously called a *kufi*, after the skullcap known as
*kufune*. They consider the beret and dreadlocks to be symbols of the
biblical covenant of God with his chosen people, the "black Israelites".