A **boonie hat** or **booney hat**, also known as **giggle hat**, is a
form of wide-brim hat commonly used by military forces. Its design is
similar to a [bucket hat](bucket_hat "wikilink") but with a stiffer
brim. Often a fabric tape band of 'branch loops' is sewn around the
[crown](Hat#Parts_of_a_hat "wikilink") of the hat. This 'foliage ring'
is meant to hold additional vegetation as
[camouflage](camouflage "wikilink"). A strap provides stability. The
crown may be vented with eyelets or small mesh panels. Snaps may also be
provided with which to fix the brim in the style of an [Australian bush
hat](slouch_hat "wikilink").

## U.S. military boonie hat

A blue cap with an all around brim was issued as part of the 1937 blue
denim fatigue uniform that was nicknamed the "[Daisy
Mae](Lil'_Abner#Daisy_Mae_Yokum_(née_Scragg) "wikilink") hat" . The
M1941 green [herringbone twill cloth](Herringbone_(cloth) "wikilink")
fatigue uniform featured the same hat. The military caps inspired
"Johnny Jeep" hats (or "Johnny Jeepers") which were featured on the
cover of the August 24, 1942 cover of [*LIFE*
magazine](Life_(magazine) "wikilink") and mocked in the accompanying
article. The cover features two female models wearing the hats in style,
while the article notes that the fashion accessory cost $25 at
John-Frederic's (from famous [milliner](milliner "wikilink") known as
[Mr. John](Mr._John "wikilink")) and the "Army hat" costs 45¢. Photos of
GIs demonstrating various ways to wear the hat are included in the
[tongue-in-cheek](tongue-in-cheek "wikilink") article. Lord Taylor
produced licensed copies for a reduced price; cheap
[knockoffs](knockoff "wikilink") ("bootleg imitations") soon followed.

The boonie hat was introduced to the [United States Armed
Forces](United_States_Armed_Forces "wikilink") during the [Vietnam
War](Vietnam_War "wikilink"), when [U.S.
Army](United_States_Army "wikilink") [Green
Berets](Special_Forces_(United_States_Army) "wikilink") began wearing
them in the field, along with
[Australian](Military_history_of_Australia_during_the_Vietnam_War "wikilink")
and [Army of the Republic of
Vietnam](Army_of_the_Republic_of_Vietnam "wikilink") units.\] These
leopard spot or [tigerstripe](tigerstripe "wikilink") boonie hats were
locally procured, and the camouflage cloth was usually salvaged from
other uniform items, parachutes, or fabricated by a tailor. The name is
derived from "boonie", the abbreviated form of
[boondocks](boondocks "wikilink") (itself originally American [military
slang](military_slang "wikilink") derived from
[Tagalog](Tagalog_language "wikilink") *bundok*, "mountain", during the
[Philippine-American War](Philippine-American_War "wikilink")). The hat
was similar to the hat worn with the pattern 1941
[HBT](Herringbone_(cloth) "wikilink")
[fatigue](United_States_Army_uniforms_in_World_War_II#Herringbone_twill_uniform "wikilink")
uniform.

In 1967, the U.S. Army began issuing boonie hats, as the "Hat, Jungle,
with Insect Net", made of [cotton](cotton "wikilink") and wind-resistant
[poplin](poplin "wikilink"), in [olive
drab](Olive_(color)#Olive_drab "wikilink"), tigerstripe, and [ERDL
pattern](ERDL_pattern "wikilink"). It was meant to supplement and
replace the
[patrol](Patrol_cap#M1951_Field_Cap_and_Ridgeway_Cap "wikilink") and
[baseball caps](baseball_cap "wikilink") that had been in service since
[World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"). As the U.S. military evolved
away from a [garrison](garrison "wikilink") mentality, the boonie hat
found a permanent place as part of the uniform of all services. The
boonie hat has changed little through the decades since the Vietnam War
and was used in the [Iraq War](Iraq_War "wikilink") and still in the
[War in Afghanistan](War_in_Afghanistan_(2001–present) "wikilink") as an
alternative to the [patrol cap](patrol_cap "wikilink"). The U.S.
military boonie hat has come in a variety of camouflage patterns; the
current assortment includes [Woodland](US_Woodland "wikilink"),
[three-color desert](Three_Color_Desert_pattern "wikilink"),
[UCP](Universal_Camouflage_Pattern "wikilink"),
[MultiCam](MultiCam "wikilink"), and both desert and woodland versions
of [MARPAT](MARPAT "wikilink"), as well as the Air Force
[ABU](Airman_Battle_Uniform "wikilink") pattern. The boonie hat is often
worn with the wearer's rank insignia pinned or sewn to the front, above
the branch loops.

### Hat, Camouflage (Tropical Combat) Type II

In 1968 the U.S. Army authorized use of the woodland ERDL pattern
([Engineering Research Development
Laboratory](Engineering_Research_Development_Laboratory "wikilink"))
material, used in the 1969 and later production of hats in cotton
[ripstop](ripstop "wikilink") material. These were labeled, "Hat,
Camouflage (Tropical Combat) Type II" with contract dates starting in
1968. They were in use from 1968 for both the Army and Air Force, and
from 1969-70 for the Marine Corps and Navy.

### Hat, Sun, Hot Weather

Later boonies are called "Hat, Sun" or "Hat, Sun, Hot Weather", which is
still the designation for this type of cover. They are made in various
patterns, in cotton ripstop or nylon blend cloth.

## Australian Army giggle hat

Similar wide-brimmed hats in the [Australian
Army](Australian_Army "wikilink") are known as giggle hats although
today most Australian soldiers refer to them as bush hats, unlike in
past where a slouch hat with the brim down was referred to as a bush
hat. Along with [slouch hats](slouch_hats "wikilink"), giggle hats were
issued as the standard uniform of Australian troops fighting in
[Southeast Asia](Southeast_Asia "wikilink") during the [Second World
War](Military_history_of_Australia_during_World_War_II "wikilink"). The
design apparently originated from an earlier British uniform intended
for fighting in hot and humid conditions. They were nicknamed "giggle
hats" (as well as "hat ridiculous-for-the-use-of") by the Australian
troops due to their appearance.

The giggle hat gained popularity during the [Malayan
Emergency](Malayan_Emergency "wikilink"). Protection from the searing
heat of Malayan conditions and heavy rain proved to be necessary.
Alongside the British, the Australian Army started issuing this type of
hat, which had a steeper and shorter brim than its earlier counterparts.
It was made with the same materials as the hot weather combat uniforms,
unlike the slouch hat, which was beginning to take on a more ceremonial
role rather than being field gear.

These hats gained popularity during the [Vietnam
War](Vietnam_War "wikilink"), where they were called 'hats utility,
jungle green', although they were colloquially known by Australians as
giggle hats. Their New Zealand counterparts referred to them as "J
hats." During this conflict, most Australian soldiers were issued the
hat. The army created several regulations: the hat was not allowed to be
modified or cut whatsoever, and it had to be worn when outdoors at all
times. The hat had also served to break up the recognizable outline of
the soldier's head. It was made with cotton twill, and was issued in
[olive drab](olive_drab "wikilink"), the standard colour of Australian
combat uniforms at the time.

Current giggle hats are issued in
[Auscam](Disruptive_Pattern_Combat_Uniform "wikilink") and [Desert
Auscam](Disruptive_Pattern_Combat_Uniform#Desert-_DPDU "wikilink"). They
continue to be heavily used by the [Australian Defence
Force](Australian_Defence_Force "wikilink"), and are issued to nearly
every person serving in the ADF.