, founder of the Scouting movement for boys, wearing a British Scout
uniform and American Stetson campaign hat c.1919\|right\]\]

A **campaign hat** or campaign cover is a broad-brimmed
[felt](felt "wikilink") or straw hat, with a high crown, pinched
symmetrically at the four corners.

The hat is most commonly worn as part of a uniform, by such
organizations as the [Royal Canadian Mounted
Police](Royal_Canadian_Mounted_Police "wikilink"), the [New Zealand
Army](New_Zealand_Army "wikilink"), [United States Park
Rangers](National_Park_Service "wikilink"), and
[Scouts](Scouting "wikilink").

The campaign hat is occasionally referred to as a
[Stetson](Stetson "wikilink"), derived from its origin in the company's
[Boss of the Plains](Boss_of_the_Plains "wikilink") model in the late
19th century. It should not be confused with the Stetson style [cowboy
hat](cowboy_hat "wikilink"), which has a different brim and crease, nor
a [slouch hat](slouch_hat "wikilink").

## History

`(middle) shown working as a `[`British`` ``South`` ``Africa`` ``Company`](British_South_Africa_Company "wikilink")` scout in 1893; comrade `[`Maurice`` ``Gifford`](Maurice_Gifford "wikilink")`, at right, wears an early peaked-style campaign hat]]`

The origins of the hat can be traced to the 1840s when U.S. Army mounted
troops posted to the far-west sometimes wore wide-brimmed civilian hats,
which were more practical than the regulation [shakos](shako "wikilink")
and [forage caps](Forage_cap#United_States_military "wikilink") then
issued. The crease was influenced by the designs of the sombreros worn
by the Mexican Vaqueros. The name started to be used after the 1872–1876
regulations, which introduced a black felt hat—which could be
[drab](drab_(color) "wikilink") after 1883—for
[fatigue](Battledress "wikilink") use derived from the types popularized
during the American Civil War. Some were worn with [campaign
cords](campaign_cord "wikilink"), mainly as a form of decoration.

At least as early as 1893, hats of the Stetson [Boss of the
Plains](Boss_of_the_Plains "wikilink") type were being creased into
pointed tops by [British South Africa
Company](British_South_Africa_Company "wikilink") (BSAC) scouts in
Africa. When designing the iconic uniform for [Boy
Scouts](Boy_Scouts "wikilink"), Baden-Powell drew on the hat worn by
[Frederick Russell Burnham](Frederick_Russell_Burnham "wikilink"), the
celebrated American scout, during his service as Chief of Scouts in the
BSAC and the British Army in the 1890s. The 1,200 Canadian troops
serving under Baden-Powell were the first to wear the campaign hat as a
part of their official uniform, and this very likely influenced
Baden-Powell's decision to order 10,000 of the hats for the British
troops.

A version of the hat, with a crease along the top of the crown, was worn
by some [US Army](US_Army "wikilink") troops during the
[Spanish–American War](Spanish–American_War "wikilink"). The army
officially adopted the "Montana peaked" design as a service hat on 8
September 1911.

Through the [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink") era, the campaign hat
worn by American soldiers was fairly soft. Those worn by the [United
States Army](United_States_Army "wikilink")'s [general
officers](general_officer "wikilink") had a golden cord around it,
whereas other [commissioned officers](commissioned_officer "wikilink")
had a golden-and-black [campaign cord](campaign_cord "wikilink") around
their hat. Field clerks, as well as their post-war successors the
[warrant officers](Warrant_Officer_(United_States) "wikilink"), had a
silver-and-black cord, while other ranks had cords in their
branch-of-service colors. The [United States Marine
Corps](United_States_Marine_Corps "wikilink") had the [Eagle, Globe, and
Anchor](Eagle,_Globe,_and_Anchor "wikilink") badge in black at the front
of their campaign hats; its officers had an additional
golden-and-scarlet cord around their hat, whereas its other ranks had
none.

By the 1930s the felt was made very stiff with a permanently flat brim.
Due to the frequent wearing of helmets in France in World War I, most
troops received a copy of the French that became known as the [overseas
cap](overseas_cap "wikilink"). In 1942 the campaign hat ceased to be
issued generally, but it was still commonly found in the Pacific theatre
for much of the war, and was the trademark of
[General](General_officer "wikilink") [Joseph
Stilwell](Joseph_Stilwell "wikilink").

## Current usage

### Royal Canadian Mounted Police

`on `[`Parliament`` ``Hill`](Parliament_Hill "wikilink")` in `[`Ottawa`](Ottawa "wikilink")`, `[`Ontario`](Ontario "wikilink")`]]`

In Canada the campaign hat was the official dress hat of the [North-West
Mounted Police](North-West_Mounted_Police "wikilink") (later [Royal
Canadian Mounted Police](Royal_Canadian_Mounted_Police "wikilink"), who
retain it as part of the full dress uniform) as well as Canadian
[cavalry](cavalry "wikilink") units in the Boer War and First World War.
In the Boer War (South Africa 1899 to 1902) all Canadian military units
with the exception of the [Royal Canadian
Regiment](Royal_Canadian_Regiment "wikilink") wore campaign hats. The
campaign hat was also the hat of the Canadian Scouts and the South
African Constabulary, which was led by a Canadian Colonel [Sam
Steele](Sam_Steele "wikilink") (formerly North-West Mounted Police),
both of these units having many Canadians enlisted. The hat was phased
out of military use by the service dress cap following the First World
War. It was also used by members of the [Ontario Provincial
Police](Ontario_Provincial_Police "wikilink"), but it was phased out in
2009 due to problems wearing them in police cruisers. Though similar to
the U.S. campaign hat, the indentations of the Canadian style hat are
somewhat deeper and appear above the face of the wearer whilst the
American hats have the indentations to the side so a regimental badge
can be worn in the middle of the hat.

### New Zealand Army

The [New Zealand Army](New_Zealand_Army "wikilink"), [whose
uniforms](Uniforms_of_the_New_Zealand_Army "wikilink") have historically
followed the British pattern, retain the felt campaign hat as their most
visible national distinction. This headdress is distinguished by a high
crown and deep indentations on all four sides. It was adopted by the
Wellington Regiment about 1912 (as proposed by [William
Malone](William_George_Malone "wikilink")) and became general issue for
all New Zealand units during the latter stages of [World War
I](World_War_I "wikilink"). In addition to badge insignia, the different
branches of service were differentiated by coloured
[puggarees](puggaree "wikilink") or wide bands around the base of the
crown (blue and red for artillery, khaki and green for mounted rifles,
khaki and red for infantry, blue for engineers, yellow for Pay Corps,
khaki and white for Army Service Corps, cherry-red for the Medical Corps
and maroon for the Veterinary Corps.). The hat was worn to a certain
extent during World War II, although often replaced by more convenient
[forage caps](forage_cap "wikilink") or [berets](berets "wikilink").
After being in abeyance since 1960, the hat was reintroduced in 1977 for
ceremonial dress, where it was usually worn with a version of the khaki
"no 2" service dress of the British Army. Officer cadets and the New
Zealand Army Band wear this headdress with a scarlet and blue full dress
uniform.

In 2012 it was announced that this form of campaign hat was to be
replaced for general wear by the ["Mounted Rifles
Hat"](Slouch_hat#New_Zealand "wikilink"); a headdress resembling that of
the Australian Army but without the turned-up side rim. The historic
"Lemon Squeezer" has however been retained for use by honour guards and
other limited categories on special formal occasions.

### United States

#### Armed Forces

`wearing a `*`campaign`` ``cover`*`]]`

The hat worn by male [United States Army](United_States_Army "wikilink")
drill sergeants is olive drab in color with a golden [Great Seal of the
United States](Great_Seal_of_the_United_States "wikilink") on a disc
centered on the front (infantry drill sergeants have a blue disc behind
the seal); this is the same insignia as traditionally worn on the
Service Cap and the Dress Cap.

The 133rd Field Artillery Regiment of the Texas Army National Guard
wears the [Fort Sill](Fort_Sill "wikilink") style Artillery Campaign Hat
during formal functions, such as the annual Saint Barbara's Day Ball.

Male and female [United States Marine
Corps](United_States_Marine_Corps "wikilink") drill instructors and
[Primary Marksmanship
Instructors](Primary_Marksmanship_Instructor "wikilink") wear similar
campaign covers with a matte black [Eagle, Globe, and
Anchor](Eagle,_Globe,_and_Anchor "wikilink") centered on the front; the
same insignia is worn on their olive drab combination covers. Enlisted
soldiers and Marines no longer wear cords around the covers, but US
Marine Corps officers who are eligible to wear the campaign cover wear a
scarlet and gold cord, with generals wearing a solid gold cord. The US
Marine Corps had their hats authorized in 1956 by
[Commandant](Commandant_of_the_Marine_Corps "wikilink")
[General](General_(United_States) "wikilink") [Randolph M.
Pate](Randolph_M._Pate "wikilink"). The cover was issued on 20 July
1956.

Male [United States Air Force](United_States_Air_Force "wikilink")
military training instructors (MTIs) wear navy blue hats with the Great
Seal of the United States within a ring, in silver color, again centered
on the front; this is the same insignia as worn on their service cap.
Female MTIs wear an Aussie Style hat. Air Force MTIs in the top ten
percent of their career field wear a light blue cord and are more likely
to be referred to as "Blue Ropes" than MTIs.

[US Coast Guard](US_Coast_Guard "wikilink") recruit training company
commanders (USCG-USN counterpart to drill instructors) wear a navy blue
version with a black cord; the insignia worn is the same as worn with
the combination cover.

The [United States Navy](United_States_Navy "wikilink") is the only US
armed force not to use the campaign hat. Their recruit division
commanders wear normal prescribed covers for their uniforms, with a red
[aiguillette](aiguillette "wikilink") on their shoulder to show their
status.

#### Park rangers

`wears a forest ranger style campaign hat]]`

Campaign hats are worn by US [park rangers](park_ranger "wikilink") of
the [National Park Service](National_Park_Service "wikilink"). The
federal troops sent to protect the resources of the first national parks
were cavalry troopers, whose campaign hat was adopted by the Park
Service as a symbol of authority.

The evolution of the campaign hat can be seen in a 1905 photo of
[Buffalo Soldiers](Buffalo_Soldiers "wikilink") in Yosemite. Although
the hat would not become Army standard until six years later, some in
the photo have re-creased their hats into the Montana Peak, probably
during their service in Cuba or the Philippines during the 1898
Spanish–American War.

Following the national park ranger style, many states' fish and game
wardens and state park police wear campaign hats. Rangers of many local
parks departments also wear the campaign hat, such as the New York City
Urban Park Rangers.

The animal logo-mascot of the [US Forest
Service](US_Forest_Service "wikilink"), Smokey Bear, wears the campaign
hat. Smokey's debut poster was released on August 9, 1944, which is
considered his birthday. Overseen by the Cooperative Forest Fire
Prevention Campaign, the first poster was illustrated by Albert Staehle.
In it, Smokey was depicted wearing [jeans](jeans "wikilink") and a
"forest ranger's hat" (a campaign hat), pouring a bucket of water on a
campfire. The message underneath reads, "Smokey says – Care will prevent
9 out of 10 forest fires!"

The emblem of the [National Park
Foundation](National_Park_Foundation "wikilink") was, until December
2013, a stylized campaign hat.

#### Law enforcement

[`Border`` ``Patrol`](United_States_Border_Patrol "wikilink")` agent in ceremonial dress wearing a campaign hat]]`

Several US [state police](State_police_(United_States) "wikilink")
services and federal agencies wear campaign hats. So common is use of
the campaign hat among state highway police that they are sometimes
referred to as "smokey bears" or "smokeys," after [Smokey
Bear](Smokey_Bear "wikilink"), the [US Forest
Service](US_Forest_Service "wikilink") mascot.

Campaign hats are also worn by the [US Border
Patrol](US_Border_Patrol "wikilink").

Many other police agencies, including numerous county sheriffs'
services, use campaign hats. Some local police use it for particular
duties or divisions; for example, officers of the [Chicago Police
Department](Chicago_Police_Department "wikilink")'s mounted unit employ
the hat, as do deputy sheriffs assigned as cadre of the [Cook County
Sheriff](Cook_County_Sheriff's_Office "wikilink")'s Boot Camp.

### Scouts

The campaign hat was worn by and associated with Robert Baden-Powell,
the founder of the Scouting movement, and is still available for wear by
Scouts of the [Boy Scouts of America](Boy_Scouts_of_America "wikilink")
and Scout organizations in several countries. Because this style of hat
is also so traditionally associated with Scouting, campaign hats are
often used as presentation items by troops and local councils for adult
Scouters and community and business leaders being honored for their
service to the Scouting movement.

Baden-Powell was British, but picked up the habit of wearing a Stetson
campaign hat and neckerchief for the first time in 1896 in Africa during
the [Second Matabele War](Second_Matabele_War "wikilink"). It was during
this time that Baden-Powell, already a cavalryman, was befriended by the
celebrated American scout [Frederick Russell
Burnham](Frederick_Russell_Burnham "wikilink"), who favored the campaign
hat. (better known today as [Scoutcraft](Scoutcraft "wikilink")). After
Baden-Powell became famous as the victor of the [Siege of
Mafeking](Siege_of_Mafeking "wikilink") in 1899, his hat became
something of a trademark. In 1900, Baden-Powell was appointed to raise
and command the [South African
Constabulary](South_African_Constabulary "wikilink") and he included the
campaign hat as part of their uniform. He may have been influenced by
the fact that the trade name of the hats, *[Boss of the
Plains](Boss_of_the_Plains "wikilink")*, was sometimes abbreviated to
B-P, Baden-Powell's own initials. When Baden-Powell re-wrote his Army
handbook *Aids to Scouting* into *[Scouting For
Boys](Scouting_For_Boys "wikilink")* in 1908, he included sketches of
[Boy Scouts](Boy_Scout "wikilink") wearing the campaign hat. He
prescribed a campaign hat as part of the Scout uniform, which he stated
was *"very like the uniform worn by my men when I commanded the South
African Constabulary"*. He continued; *"...The broad brimmed
[khaki](khaki "wikilink") hat is a good protection from sun and rain."*
*Scouting for Boys* and the [Scout Movement](Scout_Movement "wikilink")
itself quickly spread through the [British
Empire](British_Empire "wikilink") and then to other countries, such as
the United States and Russia where in both cases, Scouting started in
1909. Baden-Powell's uniform was widely imitated by Scout associations
in many countries, but eventually began to be discarded in favor of
cheaper and more practical headgear; the British [Scout
Association](Scout_Association "wikilink") introduced the [uniform
beret](uniform_beret "wikilink") as an alternative to the hat after
[World War II](World_War_II "wikilink") and finally abolished its use
altogether in 1967. The campaign hat remains an option for members of
the Boy Scouts of America.

In "traditional Scouting" organizations such as the [Baden-Powell
Scouts' Association](Baden-Powell_Scouts'_Association "wikilink") in the
United Kingdom, BP Service Association in Canada and the [Baden-Powell
Service Association](Baden-Powell_Service_Association "wikilink") in the
United States, campaign hats are worn by both male and female Scouts and
leaders.

## Gallery

<File:Pancho> Villa Expedition - Around the Campfire
HD-SN-99-02005.JPEG\|thumb\|Peaked campaign hats were popular among U.S.
infantry troops during the [Pancho Villa
Expedition](Pancho_Villa_Expedition "wikilink") of 1916 <File:Burnham>
1902 loc collection.jpg\|American scout [Frederick Russell
Burnham](Frederick_Russell_Burnham "wikilink") wearing a campaign hat in
1902 after the [Second Boer War](Second_Boer_War "wikilink"). He
introduced scouting and American woodcraft to Baden-Powell in 1896.
<File:Scouts-entente-cordiale.jpg%7CBritish> and French Boy Scouts in
1912, showing the similarity of uniforms including hats
<File:Brigadier-General> E.A. Cruikshank reviewing a group of cadets,
possibly Boy Scouts.jpg\|Canadian Boy Scouts on parade in 1915
<File:Bundesarchiv> Bild 102-07754, Prinz of Wales verleiht Preise an
Pfadfinder.jpg\|The [Prince of Wales](Prince_of_Wales "wikilink"), later
[King Edward VIII](Edward_VIII_of_the_United_Kingdom "wikilink"), in
Scout uniform and hat at the [3rd World Scout
Jamboree](3rd_World_Scout_Jamboree "wikilink") in 1929 <File:BSA>
leadership at the 1937 Scout Jamboree-E. Urner Goodman, Walter Head,
James E. West.jpg\|Adult leaders of the Boy Scouts of America, at the
first US [National Scout Jamboree](National_Scout_Jamboree "wikilink")
at [Washington D.C.](Washington_D.C. "wikilink") in 1937
<File:Baden-Powell> Scouts' Association Rover Scout.jpg\|A [Rover
Scout](Rover_Scout "wikilink") of the independent UK-based Baden-Powell
Scouts' Association. Although campaign hats have been discarded in many
Scout associations, they are sometimes retained by those who wish to
emphasise a traditional approach to Scouting. <File:Portrait> of man in
uniform wearing a NZ hat (AM 81061-1).jpg\|thumb\|New Zealand soldier in
World War II wearing NZ Army "lemon squeezer" hat.

## See also

-   [Cowboy hat](Cowboy_hat "wikilink")
-   [Forage cap](Forage_cap "wikilink")
-   [List of headgear](List_of_headgear "wikilink")
-   [Shako](Shako "wikilink")
-   [Side cap](Side_cap "wikilink")
-   [Slouch hat](Slouch_hat "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [The Campaign Hat, M1911](http://www.worldwar1.com/dbc/camph.htm)
-   [O'Ryan's Roughnecks -
    Uniforms](http://www.oryansroughnecks.org/uniforms.html)