, has more than 900 nazarenos\]\] \]\]

A **capirote** is a [pointed hat](pointed_hat "wikilink") of conical
form that is used in [Spain](Spain "wikilink"). It is part of the
uniform of some brotherhoods including the
*[Nazarenos](:es:Nazarenos "wikilink")* and *Fariseos* during
[Easter](Easter "wikilink") observances and reenactments in some areas
during [Holy Week in Spain](Holy_Week_in_Spain "wikilink") and in San
Luis Potosí, Mexico.

## History

Historically, the [flagellants](flagellant "wikilink") are the origin of
the current traditions, as they flogged themselves to do penance. [Pope
Clement VI](Pope_Clement_VI "wikilink") ordered that flagellants could
perform penance only under control of the church; he decreed *Inter
sollicitudines* ("inner concerns" for suppression). This is considered
one of the reasons why flagellants often hid their faces.

The use of the capirote or coroza was prescribed in Spain by the holy
office of [Inquisition](Inquisition "wikilink"). Men and women who were
arrested had to wear a paper capirote in public as sign of [public
humiliation](public_humiliation "wikilink"). The capirote was worn
during the session of an [Auto-da-fé](Auto-da-fé "wikilink"). The colour
was different, conforming to the judgement of the office. People who
were condemned to be executed wore a red coroza. Other punishments used
different colours.

When the Inquisition was abolished, the symbol of punishment and
penitence was kept in the Catholic brotherhood. However, the capirote
used today is different: it is covered in fine fabric, as prescribed by
the brotherhood. Later, during the celebration of the Holy Week/Easter
in Andalusia, [penitentes](wikt:penitentes "wikilink") (people doing
public penance for their sins) would walk through streets with the
capirote.

The capirote is today the symbol of the Catholic penitent: only members
of a confraternity of penance are allowed to wear them during solemn
processions. Children can receive the capirote after their first holy
communion, when they enter the brotherhood.

## Fabric

Historically the design is called the capirote, but the brotherhoods
cover it with fabric together with their face, and the medal of the
brotherhood that is worn underneath. The cloth has two holes for the
penitent to see through. The insignia or crest of the brotherhood is
usually embroidered on the capirote in fine gold.

The capirote is worn during the whole penance.

## Other uses (KKK)

In [New Orleans](History_of_New_Orleans#Spanish_rule "wikilink") during
the period between the [Rebellion of 1768](Rebellion_of_1768 "wikilink")
and the abolishment of the Spanish
[cabildo](Cabildo_(council) "wikilink"), the more risqué [Mardi
Gras](Mardi_Gras#United_States "wikilink") celebrations of the
traditionally [French Catholic](French_Catholic "wikilink") residents
were strictly curtailed by incoming Spanish clergy. The
[anti-Catholic](Anti-Catholicism "wikilink") [second Ku Klux
Klan](Ku_Klux_Klan#Second_Klan:_1915.E2.80.931944 "wikilink") that arose
at the beginning of the twentieth century may have modeled part of their
[regalia and insignia](Ku_Klux_Klan_regalia_and_insignia "wikilink") on
the capirote and [sanbenito](sanbenito "wikilink") as a sardonic nod to
the enforcement of these restrictions on masquerades a century earlier.

<File:Francisco> de Goya - Escena de Inquisición - Google Art
Project.jpg\|[The Inquisition
Tribunal](The_Inquisition_Tribunal "wikilink") <File:Francisco> de Goya
y Lucientes 025.jpg\|*A Procession of Flagellants*,
[Goya](Francisco_Goya "wikilink"), 1812-1819 <File:Caprichos> Nr 23,
Dieser Staub.jpg\|*Prisoner wearing capirote and Sanbenito*,
[Goya](Francisco_Goya "wikilink") <File:Execution> of Mariana de
Carabajal.jpg\|Execution of [Francisca Nuñez de
Carabajal](Francisca_Nuñez_de_Carabajal "wikilink"), Mexico City, 1601

## See also

-
-   [List of headgear](List_of_headgear "wikilink")

## References