A**cappello romano** (pl. *cappelli romani*; Italian: " ") or
**saturno** (pl. *saturni*; because its appearance is reminiscent of the
ringed planet [Saturn](Saturn "wikilink")) is a hat with a wide,
circular brim and a rounded crown worn outdoors in some countries by
[Catholic clergy](holy_orders_in_the_Catholic_Church "wikilink"), when
dressed in a [cassock](cassock "wikilink"). It is made of either [beaver
fur](beaver_fur "wikilink") or [felt](felt "wikilink"), and lined in
white [silk](silk "wikilink"). Unlike many other articles of [clerical
clothing](clerical_clothing "wikilink"), it serves no ceremonial
purpose, being primarily a practical item. (The
[galero](galero "wikilink") is a ceremonial wide brim hat no longer
usually worn, though on February 19, 2011, [Raymond Cardinal
Burke](Raymond_Leo_Burke "wikilink") became the first
[cardinal](Cardinal_(Catholic_Church) "wikilink") in recent times to
wear (for a single photo) the galero.) The cappello romano is not used
in [liturgical services](Catholic_liturgy "wikilink"). Since the general
abandonment of the cassock as street dress, it is uncommon even in
[Rome](Rome "wikilink") today, though it was quite popular there and in
some other countries with a Catholic majority population from the 17th
century until around 1970.

There are some, mostly minor, differences in the designs of cappelli,
depending on the rank of the wearer. The [pope](pope "wikilink") wears a
red cappello with gold cords. Cardinals formerly also had the privilege
of wearing a red cappello, but this rule was overturned by [Pope Paul
VI](Pope_Paul_VI "wikilink"), and now Cardinals' cappelli are black, as
are those of all other clerics.

A cardinal may have a cappello with red and gold cords with scarlet
lining. A [bishop](bishop_in_the_Catholic_Church "wikilink")'s may have
green and gold cords with violet lining. A
[priest](priesthood_in_the_Catholic_Church "wikilink") may substitute
black lining for his. Cappelli for [deacons](deacon "wikilink") and
[seminarians](seminary "wikilink") have no distinguishing features.

This hat has been used by [Koishi Komeiji](Koishi_Komeiji "wikilink")
from [Touhou Project](Touhou_Project "wikilink") in [Subterranean
Animism](Subterranean_Animism "wikilink")

## See also

-   [The Philippi Collection](The_Philippi_Collection "wikilink")

## Notes

## References

-

## External links

-   [Picture of the Saturno of Pope Benedict
    XVI](http://www.dieter-philippi.de/images/sonstiges/Saturno%20Papale_1.jpg)
-   [Picture of the red summer Saturno of Pope Benedict XVI, the white
    summer Saturno of Pope John XXIII and a black beaver-hair winter
    Saturno of an archbishop, all hand
    embroidered](http://www.dieter-philippi.de/images/sonstiges/SaturnoEmbroideries.JPG)