A **cartwheel hat** (also **cart wheel hat**) is a wide brimmed circular
or saucer-shaped design. It may be made in a variety of materials,
including straw or felt and usually has a low crown. It may be similar
to the [picture hat](picture_hat "wikilink") and [halo-brimmed
hat](Halo_hat "wikilink") in shape. Typically, it is worn at an angle to
show off the curve of the brim, rather than being worn at the back of
the head in the manner of a halo hat.

## History

`wearing a cartwheel hat with transparent brim, c. 1910]]`

The cartwheel hat became popular in the years leading up to [World War
I](World_War_I "wikilink"). The *[Milwaukee
Sentinel](Milwaukee_Sentinel "wikilink")* described the new fashion in
1914: "Do not be astounded if you notice a smartly gowned woman with a
hat of huge proportions...The new large hats are broad brimmed and have
low crowns, which are not discernible when the hat is worn, hence they
resemble cartwheels tilted at a becoming angle". These early versions
might be covered in [velvet](velvet "wikilink"),
[taffeta](taffeta "wikilink") or [silk](silk "wikilink"); some included
flower, fur or feather trims.

`racegoers sporting cartwheel-shaped sunhats, 1939]]`

### 1930s styles

The cartwheel hat appeared in films and fashion during the 1930s – an
American newspaper described the latest Paris fashion for straight and
curled-brim cartwheel designs in 1934. The correspondent described
crowns so shallow that hats had to be secured with a rubber band above
or below the hair, which must be "perfectly coiffed" as it was revealed
by the hat. In 1936, an Australian newspaper report about racegoers at
Brisbane's [Ascot](Ascot,_Queensland "wikilink") racing meeting noted
the abundance of: "wide-brimmed shady hats of the cartwheel type". The
following year, *[The Observer](The_Observer "wikilink")* described:
"cartwheel hats with exceedingly low crowns and brims which slope very
slightly downwards", also noting that London milliner [Aage
Thaarup](Aage_Thaarup "wikilink") was showing versions for
[Ascot](Ascot_Racecourse "wikilink") in straw and lemon-yellow felt.

One of the most influential showcases of the potential of the style was
the 1939 film *[Gone with the
Wind](Gone_with_the_Wind_(film) "wikilink")*, in which [Vivien
Leigh](Vivien_Leigh "wikilink") (Scarlett O'Hara) wore a huge cartwheel
with green ribbons designed by celebrity milliner [Mr.
John](Mr._John "wikilink").

## 'New Look' trends

While a [Hattie Carnegie](Hattie_Carnegie "wikilink") cartwheel design
appeared on the cover of American *[Vogue](Vogue_(magazine) "wikilink")*
in 1938, the style is most associated with the period after [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink") austerity and make-do-and-mend was over. By
1945, new cartwheel styles were being offered with open crowns. *,
showing classic cartwheel hats worn at a jaunty angle, 1957\]\] Four
years later, [Rita Hayworth](Rita_Hayworth "wikilink") wore a variation
on the cartwheel made of sheer material to match the pleated [Jacques
Fath](Jacques_Fath "wikilink") dress for her 'low key' wedding to [Aly
Khan](Aly_Khan "wikilink") – an event that generated huge interest and
replica designs of her outfit. By spring 1950, the cartwheel hat was
being tipped in*[Life](Life_(magazine) "wikilink")*alongside pleated
dresses as the: "new silhouette". The hat designs featured were also by
Mr. John. A month later,*Life'' noted: "The recent tendency to go
bareheaded has been reversed simply because the new season's narrow
silhouette looks better when balanced with a hat." The article singled
out the cartwheel in a new "unseasonal" coral velvet.

, seen here with [Prince Harry](Prince_Harry "wikilink"), wore a [Philip
Somerville](Philip_Somerville "wikilink") cartwheel design in 2008\]\]
The cartwheel became particularly closely associated with [New
Look](Christian_Dior_S.A.#The_.22New_Look.22 "wikilink") fashions.
Dior's Y-line collection of autumn 1955 showcased cartwheel hats, paired
with pearls, princess-line dresses and stoles. While the size and shape
of hats could be extreme, such designs were made not just for day but
evening wear; the [Victoria and Albert
Museum](Victoria_and_Albert_Museum "wikilink") archive includes a
[Christian Dior](Christian_Dior_S.A. "wikilink") cocktail frock designed
to be worn with matching [tulle](Tulle_netting "wikilink") cartwheel
hat.

High-profile wearers of the style included [Queen
Elizabeth](Elizabeth_II "wikilink") who wore a straw cartwheel shape on
her tour of Australia the year after her
[coronation](Coronation_of_Elizabeth_II "wikilink") – although her hat
was less extreme than some of the Dior models.

## Post 1950s revivals

The cartwheel hat has continued as a favourite showstopper for weddings
and events – with designers such as [Philip
Somerville](Philip_Somerville "wikilink"), [Graham
Smith](Graham_Smith_(milliner) "wikilink") and [Frederick
Fox](Frederick_Fox_(milliner) "wikilink") including them in their
millinery ranges. There have also been notable revivals in high fashion;
[Christian Lacroix](Christian_Lacroix "wikilink") featured dramatic
forward-angled designs in his 1987 autumn collection. He also featured
cartwheel shapes in neon orange and shocking pink in 2002.

## See also

-   [Halo hat](Halo_hat "wikilink")
-   [Mushroom hat](Mushroom_hat "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Cartwheel hat at University of North Texas
    archive](https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc30000/)
-   [New South Wales museum collection, black cartwheel design, c.
    1950](https://web.archive.org/web/20141129021044/http://collections.ncc.nsw.gov.au/keemu/pages/nrm/Display.php?irn=7442&QueryPage=%2Fkeemu%2Fpages%2Fnrm%2FQuery.php)
-   [Getty image of 1946 cartwheel hat and evening
    gown](http://www.gettyimages.co.uk/detail/news-photo/cartwheel-hat-strapless-evening-dress-and-stole-news-photo/53369964)
-   [British Pathé film showing cartwheel models,
    1950](http://www.britishpathe.com/video/summer-hats-dublin-special/query/America)
-   [Stephen Jones contemporary cartwheel hat in Ryerson Fashion
    Research
    Collection](http://ryerson-fashion-research-collection.com/tag/hats/)