A **cricket cap** is a type of soft [cap](cap "wikilink"), often made
from [felt](felt "wikilink"), that is a traditional form of headwear for
players of the game of [cricket](cricket "wikilink"), regardless of age
or gender. It is usually a tight-fitting skullcap, usually made of six
or eight sections, with a small crescent shaped brim that points
downwards over the brow to provide shade for the eyes. It is often, but
not always, elasticised at the rear to hold it in place upon the
wearer's head. Sometimes, rather than tight-fitting, the cricket cap
comes in a baggy variety, that is always kept in place by elastic.

## Description

The style of cap is also often used as official headwear as part of
[school uniforms](school_uniforms "wikilink") for boys from private
schools, particularly in the United Kingdom and throughout the
[Commonwealth of Nations](Commonwealth_of_Nations "wikilink"). Although
not common in the modern period, the cricket cap used to be a
fashionable form of headwear for people who were casually dressed, and
not necessarily worn just for playing the game.

Cricket caps are usually, but not always multi-coloured in the colours
of the [cricket club](cricket_club "wikilink") or school for which the
cap is designed to represent. Sometimes they are particularly
elaborately patterned with different sections in different colours, or
different coloured rings or hoops around them. At international level,
the cap is traditionally made from a single colour. However, in recent
years in particular, many cricket teams, particularly for [limited overs
cricket](limited_overs_cricket "wikilink") have opted to wear [baseball
caps](baseball_caps "wikilink"), rather than traditional cricket caps,
but the style is still quite popular for [first-class
cricket](first-class_cricket "wikilink") teams, as well as [Test
cricket](Test_cricket "wikilink") sides.

The origins of the cricket cap are hard to discern, however prints
showing the game being played in the eighteenth century, already depict
players wearing a variety similar versions of the traditional cricket
cap.

Perhaps the most famous version of the cricket cap in the modern setting
is the [baggy green](baggy_green "wikilink") cricket cap of the
[Australian cricket team](Australian_cricket_team "wikilink"), for which
the players and fans of Australia hold a degree of reverence. The cap is
treated with a degree of [mysticism](mysticism "wikilink"), and players
who have long careers often refuse to replace the original one they
receive as they often feel the cap is a lucky talisman. This sometimes
results in players who have long careers wearing their cricket caps in
quite a tattered state. The Australian side has long worn their baggy
cricket cap, rather than alternatives such as a [sun
hat](sun_hat "wikilink"), for the first session of each match as a
symbol of team solidarity.

## Other usage

Players who represent international cricket sides are often presented
with a cap ceremonially before their debut. This is called "receiving
their first cap". The [cap is numbered](England_Cap_Numbers "wikilink")
according to how many players have represented that side before them.
For example, Indian cricketer [Sachin
Tendulkar](Sachin_Tendulkar "wikilink") was the 187th player to
represent India at Test level, and was awarded cap number 187. It is
also sometimes used to refer to the number of times a player has played.
Tendulkar played 200 Tests for India, so therefore he is said to have
received 200 caps. While an actual cap may not necessarily be presented
on every occasion, ceremonial cap presentations are often made for
milestone appearances such as a player's 50th or 100th Test, in addition
to debuts.

Some countries also award a domestic type generally known as a "county
cap". The latter system is most commonly applied in English [county
cricket](county_cricket "wikilink"). Most counties do not automatically
award caps to players on their first appearance; instead, they have to
be "earned" through good performances. Indeed, one can play at the
highest domestic level for several years, and have a quite significant
career in [first-class cricket](first-class_cricket "wikilink"), without
ever winning a cap.

### Records

The world [record for the number of caps in Test
cricket](record_for_the_number_of_caps_in_Test_cricket "wikilink") is
held by [Sachin Tendulkar](Sachin_Tendulkar "wikilink") of
[India](Indian_cricket_team "wikilink"), who has, over the course of a
24-year career, collected 200. Tendulkar also holds the record for [One
Day Internationals](One_Day_International "wikilink"), with 463 caps.

## See also

-   [Cap (sport)](Cap_(sport) "wikilink")
-   [Baggy green](Baggy_green "wikilink")
-   [Flat cap](Flat_cap "wikilink")
-   [List of headgear](List_of_headgear "wikilink")

## References