A **deerstalker** is a type of [cap](cap "wikilink") that is typically
worn in rural areas, often for hunting, especially [deer
stalking](deer_stalking "wikilink"). Because of the cap's popular
association with [Sherlock Holmes](Sherlock_Holmes "wikilink"), it has
become stereotypical headgear for a detective, especially in comical
drawings or [cartoons](cartoon "wikilink") along with farcical plays and
films.

`with a dearstalker cap glassing the surroundings with a `[`monocular`](monocular "wikilink")`]]`

## Construction

The deerstalker is most often made of cloth, often light or heavy wool
[tweed](tweed_(cloth) "wikilink"), although deerstalkers made of
[suede](suede "wikilink"), white [cotton duck](cotton_duck "wikilink")
and even [denim](denim "wikilink") are not unknown. The cap is made of
six (or eight) triangular panels with rounded sides which are sewn
together. If the sides of the panels are cut in a way giving them
slightly rounded shoulders midway, the crown will become more squared
and flatter rather than hemispherical. The cap may be deep or shallow,
barely touching the tops of the ears, according to the whim of the
hatter. Either way, it is usually lined with an inner cap of
[satin](satin "wikilink"), [polished cotton](polished_cotton "wikilink")
or similar lining fabrics. Occasionally one can find a deerstalker with
a lightly quilted satin lining.

The deerstalker's main features are a pair of semicircular [bills or
visors](Visor "wikilink") worn in front and rear. These are usually
stiffened with [pasteboard](pasteboard_(paper_product) "wikilink"),
[cardboard](cardboard_(paper_product) "wikilink") or layers of heavy
[canvas](canvas "wikilink"). For a brief period during the 1970s some
deerstalkers were manufactured with bills stiffened by the steam-cooked
and pressure-molded wood fiber construct called
[Masonite](Masonite "wikilink"). The Masonite tended to crack and break
into segments. Over time, the Masonite insert was also apt to crumble at
the corners.

Along with its visors, a deerstalker has a pair of unstiffened cloth
earflaps attached to either side of the cap. These are tied together by
[grosgrain](grosgrain "wikilink") ribbons or by laces or, very
occasionally, held together by snaps or a button. The dual bills provide
protection from the sun for the face and neck of the wearer during
extended periods out of doors, such as for hunting or fishing. The
earflaps, tied under the chin, provide protection in cold weather and
high winds. They are otherwise tied together above the crown to keep
them out of the way.

Deerstalkers may be made of solid-coloured material, but they are most
often found with [houndstooth](houndstooth "wikilink") check,
[herringbone](herringbone_(cloth) "wikilink"), or
[plaid](wikt:plaid "wikilink") patterns in the [twill](twill "wikilink")
of a fabric which serves as [camouflage](camouflage "wikilink"). Modern
hunting clothes, including deerstalkers, are often made with either a
red-and-black or an orange-and-black check pattern or
[tweed](tweed_(cloth) "wikilink") for both this purpose and [hunter
safety](hunting "wikilink"), not least in actual [deer
stalking](deer_stalking "wikilink"), for which purpose
[milliners](Millinery "wikilink") originally constructed this type of
cap.

## Variations

The "sportsman's deerstalker" is made with a narrow
[brim](brim_(hat) "wikilink") attached to the cap instead of the usual
double bills. The earflaps are eliminated as well. Some types of this
cap sport a belt fashioned from the same material around the crown. This
version is seldom worn by hunters. It is, however, much favoured by
fishermen.

The variants of the "Irish" style deerstalker are minor but significant.
The cap is fronted with a cloth panel instead of the usual seam. The
earflaps, wide and triangular in the standard version, are narrow with
straight sides. The usual semicircular visors may be replaced by short,
rectangular bills, [George C. Scott](George_C._Scott "wikilink") wore
this type of deerstalker as a [jurist](jurist "wikilink") who imagines
himself to be Sherlock Holmes in the 1971 film, [*They Might be
Giants*.](They_Might_Be_Giants_(film) "wikilink")

Another type is a cap made of heavy cloth with paired earflaps,
sometimes lined with [fur](fur "wikilink") or
[lambskin](lambskin_(sheepskin) "wikilink"), and a single visor in
front. A cloth band turned up in the rear that can be lowered to protect
the back of the neck takes the place of the rear visor. An exaggerated
version of this type of deerstalker is often seen in cartoons, such that
worn by [Elmer Fudd](Elmer_Fudd "wikilink") when he's hunting "wabbits".

Yet another variety is the [flat cap](flat_cap "wikilink"), [newsboy
cap](newsboy_cap "wikilink") or [golf cap](golf_cap "wikilink")
featuring paired earflaps snapped or buttoned together with, again, a
single visor and a matching cloth band in the rear that can be turned
down along with the earflaps.

There is also a reversible deerstalker. It looks like the standard,
double-billed model but it can be turned inside out, revealing an
entirely different fabric or even suede, with the contrasting earflaps
of the original fabric turned backward and tied together.

## Alternative names

The deerstalker cap is also known as a "fore-and-aft" cap in reference
to its front and rear bills. This headgear is also called a
"[tweed](tweed_(cloth) "wikilink") helmet," due to its resemblance to
the basic design of the [Balaclava helmet](Balaclava_helmet "wikilink")
worn by British soldiers during the [Crimean
War](Crimean_War "wikilink"). Due to the band [Thee
Headcoats](Thee_Headcoats "wikilink") who, along with their fans, made a
habit of wearing the cap it is sometimes called a headcoat.

## Sherlock Holmes

`and a `[`magnifying`` ``glass`](magnifying_glass "wikilink")`, paraphernalia typically associated with `[`Sherlock`` ``Holmes`](Sherlock_Holmes "wikilink")`]]`

The most famous wearer of a deerstalker is undoubtedly the fictional
character [Sherlock Holmes](Sherlock_Holmes "wikilink"), who is
popularly depicted favouring this style of cap. Holmes is never actually
described as wearing a deerstalker by name in [Arthur Conan
Doyle](Arthur_Conan_Doyle "wikilink")'s stories, though. However, most
notably in "[The Adventure of Silver
Blaze](The_Adventure_of_Silver_Blaze "wikilink")", the narrator, [Doctor
Watson](Doctor_Watson "wikilink"), describes him as wearing "his
ear-flapped travelling cap", and in "[The Boscombe Valley
Mystery](The_Boscombe_Valley_Mystery "wikilink")", as wearing a
"close-fitting cloth cap". As the deerstalker is the most typical cap of
the period matching both descriptions, it is not surprising that the
original illustrations for the stories by [Sidney
Paget](Sidney_Paget "wikilink") (who favored a deerstalker himself) in
Great Britain, and [Frederic Dorr
Steele](Frederic_Dorr_Steele "wikilink") in the United States, along
with other illustrators of the period, depicted Holmes as a "deerstalker
man", which then became the popular perception of him.

Later, less-informed depictions of Holmes have him wearing this cap in
the city, failing to take into account the fact that the
fashion-conscious Holmes would be loath to commit such a sartorial faux
pas; the deerstalker is traditionally a rural outdoorsman's cap. It is
not appropriate headgear for the properly dressed urban gentleman.
Still, while contemporaneous illustrators portrayed Holmes as wearing a
deerstalker in the proper setting for such attire, travelling
cross-country or operating in a rural outdoor setting, Sidney Paget
chose to depict Holmes as wearing the deerstalker in London while
keeping vigil for the appearance of the murderous [Colonel Sebastian
Moran](Colonel_Sebastian_Moran "wikilink") in illustrations made for
"[The Empty House](The_Empty_House "wikilink")" when the story first
appeared in *[Strand Magazine](Strand_Magazine "wikilink")* in 1904.
This is uncharacteristic of Paget who most often depicts Holmes wearing
a black [top hat](top_hat "wikilink") and [frock
coat](frock_coat "wikilink") in the city, as shown in the Regent Street
scene in *[The Hound of the
Baskervilles](The_Hound_of_the_Baskervilles "wikilink")*, or sporting a
black [bowler](bowler_hat "wikilink") when wearing a black or plaid
[Inverness cape](Inverness_cape "wikilink") (or, more accurately, a
[macfarlane](wikt:Macfarlane "wikilink") cape-coat) as seen in his
illustrations for "[The Blue Carbuncle](The_Blue_Carbuncle "wikilink")"
and "[The Musgrave Ritual](The_Musgrave_Ritual "wikilink")"
respectively.

It has been supposed that Holmes' indiscriminate use of the deerstalker
cap occurred because of the popularity of the two [period films from
1939](Sherlock_Holmes_(1939_film_series) "wikilink") in which [Basil
Rathbone](Basil_Rathbone "wikilink") starred as Holmes, *[The Hound of
the Baskervilles](The_Hound_of_the_Baskervilles_(1939_film) "wikilink")*
and *[The Adventures of Sherlock
Holmes](The_Adventures_of_Sherlock_Holmes_(film) "wikilink")*. This is
erroneous. In both of these films Holmes is shown properly wearing the
deerstalker in the countryside or in a rural setting.

That Sherlock Holmes has been frequently depicted wearing a deerstalker
regardless of setting, was popularised in the United States by the
pastel and line drawings of Frederic Dorr Steele whose illustrations of
Holmes wearing the deerstalker were created for *[Collier's
Magazine](Collier's_Magazine "wikilink")* and other periodicals. Steele
based his concept of Holmes mainly on photographs of the actor [William
Gillette](William_Gillette "wikilink"), who had become hugely popular as
a portrayer of Holmes during the first third of the 20th century.
Gillette had worn a deerstalker in his stage play which first ran in
1899. It was left to Steele's influential drawings to popularise Holmes
as wearing a deerstalker so that the cap became synonymous with the
detective.

## See also

-   [Stormy Kromer cap](Stormy_Kromer_cap "wikilink")
-   [List of headgear](List_of_headgear "wikilink")
-   [Cap](Cap "wikilink")

## References