`wearing a printed silk draped turban in 1975]]`

A **draped turban** or **turban hat** is a millinery design in which
fabric is draped to create headwear closely moulded to the head.
Sometimes it may be stiffened or padded, although simpler versions may
just comprise wound fabric that is knotted or stitched. It may include a
peak, feather or other details to add height. It generally covers most
or all of the hair.

In fashion, the draped turban has a history dating back to at least the
late 18th century, and had revivals in most decades of the 20th century.
Notably, it rose to popularity in the 1910s as a symbol of eastern
glamour, while in the 1940s it was worn by everyone from Hollywood stars
to [land girls](Women's_Land_Army_(World_War_II) "wikilink"). In the
1960s and 1970s, it was revived by designers including
[Biba](Biba "wikilink") in the UK and [Halston](Halston "wikilink") in
the US – and worn by royalty and hippies alike. More recently, new
designs began appearing on the fashion catwalks and in the second *[Sex
and the City](Sex_and_the_City "wikilink")* movie.

## 18th and 19th centuries

\]\]

While earlier portraits show examples of the turban in women's dress –
notably Vermeer's 1665 portrait *[Girl with a Pearl
Earring](Girl_with_a_Pearl_Earring "wikilink")* – the draped turban is
first recorded as a widespread fashion in Britain in the late 18th
century, rising to even greater popularity during the [Regency
era](Regency_era "wikilink"); this was a fashion said to be inspired by
increased trade with India for the import of cottons. The fashion may
also have been partly inspired by growing interest in, and knowledge of,
the [Ottoman Empire](Ottoman_Empire "wikilink") and
[Turkey](Turkey "wikilink"). The writings of [Lady Mary Wortley
Montagu](Lady_Mary_Wortley_Montagu "wikilink") on Turkey are also said
to have been an influence. There are several portraits of her in turban
style headgear and the turban was also sometimes known as the *turk* or
*chiffonet*.

The style of turban was initially simple, in keeping with the drape of
gowns of the time, but as its popularity developed it tended to follow
the fashion in hair and became progressively larger as hairstyles became
more elaborate. Turbans might be lavishly decorated with plumes for
balls and functions, but also for daywear – as satirised in a 1796
[James Gillray](James_Gillray "wikilink") cartoon, *High Change in Bond
Street*. The fashion remained during the early decades of the 19th
century, with examples of Paris and London fashions from the 1830s
showing ornate turban headdresses topped with tall plumes. The "a la
turque" style of headdress, influenced and inspired by the popular
interest in Eastern cultures, was popular in the 1820s.

## Early 20th century

`in an ornate turban hat,1910]]`

[Paul Poiret](Paul_Poiret "wikilink"), the so-called 'Sultan de la
mode', included the turban in his revival of
'[oriental](Orientalism "wikilink")' styles in the early 1910s. As part
of his research Poiret visited the [Victoria and Albert
Museum](Victoria_and_Albert_Museum "wikilink") in order to study its
collection of antique Indian turbans, declaring "I admired unwaveringly
the diversity of their so logical and so elegant forms."

Turbans continued gaining in popularity from the early 1920s. Some of
this may have been due to the increasing availability of the [motor
car](Vintage_car "wikilink"), since the close-fitting design helped to
protect the hair and head from the elements. A 1923 fashion report in
*[The Times](The_Times "wikilink")* described the arrival of neat
leather caps and new turban designs, adding that the turban is: "seen in
many embroidered and swathed varieties, some of which are built on
'beret', others on Russian designs, turning right off the face, and some
on close-fitting lines." Its popularity survived the decade, a 1929
newspaper report on the autumn Paris fashions noted that the [cloche
hat](cloche_hat "wikilink") had given way to the
[Basque](Basque_people "wikilink") [beret](beret "wikilink") and the
turban trimmed with ribbon bows. Designs were typically made of silk,
felt or velvet and could be finished with additional details such as
feathers or brooches.

In 1937, the turban hat was tipped as one of the "smartest models in the
new millinery", with new designs being shown in heavier fabrics such as
velvet. In London, *The Times* reported on a Paris ensemble of
[astrakhan fur](Karakul_sheep "wikilink") coat with velvet dress and
draped velvet turban to match. The following year, it featured a high
draped turban with attached veil as being among the latest bridal
fashions.

## Wartime and post-war popularity

`to promote wartime chic]]`

The hat remained popular in Europe throughout
[wartime](World_War_II "wikilink") – it may have been helped by the fact
that women were working in manual jobs in factories and farms. It was a
design that could be created with minimal sewing skills and helped to
conceal the hair when access to hairdressers, shampoo, and even water,
might be limited. Simple patterns for draped turbans had been published
from the 1920s. The [Ministry of
Information](Ministry_of_Information_(United_Kingdom) "wikilink") in the
UK showcased a turban as part of a series of photographs to promote
possibilities for wartime chic during a period when [utility
clothing](utility_clothing "wikilink") and rationing were interrupting
the traditional fashion industry. While DIY turbans were easy to
construct – a wartime [British Pathé](Pathe_News "wikilink") film even
demonstrated how to make a selection of designs with a couple of knotted
scarves as part of its *Ways and Means* series – many materials used for
making hats were excluded from the worst rationing strictures during the
war, and this may help to explain the rise in whimsical hat styles for
those who could afford them.

### Hollywood-style glamour

`wearing a turban, 1941]]`

While the fashion for the turban was partly borne of necessity in
Europe, it became chic when it appeared on the heads of Hollywood icons.
The French milliner [Madame Paulette](Madame_Paulette "wikilink")
(Pauline Adam de la Bruyère) is often credited with reviving the turban
and claimed to have been inspired by the designs she saw on French girls
cycling the streets of Paris during the war. She went on to create hats
worn by [Gloria Swanson](Gloria_Swanson "wikilink"), [Marlene
Dietrich](Marlene_Dietrich "wikilink") and [Greta
Garbo](Greta_Garbo "wikilink"). Later, she would also create designs for
fashion houses such as [Chanel](Chanel_S.A. "wikilink") and
[Ungaro](Emanuel_Ungaro "wikilink") [Madame
Agnès](Madame_Agnès "wikilink"), who had trained under [Caroline
Reboux](Caroline_Reboux "wikilink"), was also designing turbans and a
black fabric creation with ornate padded top-piece and scarf draping
carried under the chin is part of the museum collection of the
[FIDM](Fashion_Institute_of_Design_&_Merchandising "wikilink") in Paris.

While [Lana Turner](Lana_Turner "wikilink") created an iconic image of
femme fatale in turban in *[The Postman Always Rings
Twice](The_Postman_Always_Rings_Twice_(1946_film) "wikilink")*, the
growing US popularity of South American stars such as [Carmen
Miranda](Carmen_Miranda "wikilink") also raised the profile of the
draped turban as glamour wear – Miranda wore hers in a variety of
extreme permutations in her films.

`with `[`Prince`` ``Rainier`` ``III`](Prince_Rainier_III "wikilink")` sporting a fashionable turban hat in 1961 at `[`The`` ``White`` ``House`](The_White_House "wikilink")`]]`

## 1950s and beyond

Versions of the draped turban started to gain in popularity again from
the mid 1950s; in 1955, *The Times* reported on a
[Dior](Christian_Dior_S.A. "wikilink") ensemble taking in the eastern
trend and comprising [sheath dress](sheath_dress "wikilink") in brocaded
silk, matching jacket trimmed with [sable](sable "wikilink") fur and
brocaded silk draped turban. Turban styles were adapted to accommodate
more bouffant hair styles.

In the early 1970s, the London boutique Biba featured turbans, often
paired with kaftans or diaphanous blouses – a look in keeping with the
prevailing trends for both 1920s/30s and eastern styles. Often turbans
were created as part of eveningwear; an example of a Biba evening coat
and matching turban in [rayon](rayon "wikilink") and
[Lurex](Lurex "wikilink") knit is now part of the [Victoria and Albert
Museum](Victoria_and_Albert_Museum "wikilink") archive. American
designer Halston also featured the turban for eveningwear, and dressed
fashion icons such as [Bianca Jagger](Bianca_Jagger "wikilink"). The
fashion for draped turbans also spread beyond disco glamour – [Elizabeth
Taylor](Elizabeth_Taylor "wikilink"), [Joan
Collins](Joan_Collins "wikilink") and the Queen all wore them with
daywear.

### Modern revivals

`2007]]`

Turbans were tipped as a potential eveningwear accessory in 2006, as
part of a [1970s disco revival](1970s_in_fashion "wikilink"). They began
appearing on the fashion catwalks in 2007 and made an appearance in
*[Sex and the City 2](Sex_and_the_City_2 "wikilink")* – including a gold
model from [Ralph Lauren](Ralph_Lauren "wikilink")'s 2009 collection.

## References

## External links

-   [c1820 plaid weave silk turban from Victoria & Albert Museum
    collection](https://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O168740/hat-unknown/)
-   [British Pathé film about DIY turbans from *Ways and Means*
    series](http://www.britishpathe.com/video/turbans-issue-title-is-ways-and-means)
-   [1959 Simone Mirman turban in padded silk from the Victoria & Albert
    Museum
    collection](https://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O229297/la-langouste-fantasie-hat-mirman-simone/)
-   [1979 Frederick Fox evening turban with feather, from Victoria &
    Albert Museum
    collection](https://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O137774/evening-hat-frederick-fox/)
-   [Halston dress and turban from Elizabeth Taylor collection at
    Christie's
    auctioneers](http://www.christies.com/lotfinder/textiles-costume/a-halston-scarlet-silk-jersey-draped-evening-5502656-details.aspx)
-   [Turban trend report in
    2011](https://web.archive.org/web/20141029153309/http://www.classy-n-glamorous.com/2011/04/then-and-now-turban-look.html)
-   [Fashion's Most Wanted blog, on
    turbans](http://fashionsmostwanted.blogspot.co.uk/2011/03/in-search-of-perfect-turban.html)