, wearing a red fascinator during her visit to Canada in 2011\]\] A
**fascinator** is a [formal](formal_wear "wikilink")
[headpiece](headpiece "wikilink") for women, a style of
[millinery](Hatmaking "wikilink"), originally of lightweight knitted
[fabric](fabric "wikilink"). Since the 1990s the term refers to a type
of formal headwear worn as an alternative to the [hat](hat "wikilink");
it is usually a large decorative design attached to a band or clip,
sometimes incorporating a base to resemble a hat, in which case it may
be called a **hatinator**.

## History

It was customary for Christian women in Europe to wear some sort of
[headcovering](Christian_headcovering "wikilink"). The European fashion
of decorating the head with a hat can be traced back to the late
[Renaissance era](Renaissance_era "wikilink") of the 16th century.
Starting with the [Baroque era](Baroque_era "wikilink") of the 17th
century head decorations without a hat developed. Queen [Marie
Antoinette](Marie_Antoinette "wikilink") made the fashion of using
[ostrich](ostrich "wikilink") feathers as a head decoration popular
among the European royal courts. Increased trade with Africa meant
ostrich feathers were becoming more readily available to be used in
fashion items, although this was still costly and therefore affordable
only to the aristocracy and upper class.

In the 19th century, a fascinator was also a lightweight hood or scarf
worn about the head and tied under the chin, typically knitted or
crocheted. It was made from soft, lightweight yarns and may originally
have been called a "cloud". The "cloud" is described in 1870 as being "a
light scarf of fine knitting over the head and round the neck, \[worn\]
instead of an opera hood when going out at night." The fascinator went
out of fashion in the 1930s, by which time it described a lacy hood
similar to a "fussy [balaclava](balaclava_(clothing) "wikilink")."

The use of the term "fascinator" to describe a particular form of late
20th- and early 21st-century millinery emerged towards the end of the
late 20th century, possibly as a term for 1990s designs inspired by the
small 1960s cocktail hats, which were designed to perch upon the highly
coiffed hairstyles of the period.

## Uses

, with the Queen wearing a blue hat, the Duchess of Cambridge a pink
hatinator, and Princess Eugenie of York a fascinator (June 2013)\]\]
Today, a fascinator is worn on occasions where hats are customary,
sometimes serving as an evening accessory, when it may be called a
[cocktail hat](cocktail_hat "wikilink"). It is generally worn with
fairly formal attire. In addition, fascinators are frequently worn by
women as a [Christian headcovering](Christian_headcovering "wikilink")
during [church services](church_service "wikilink"), especially
[weddings](Christian_views_on_marriage "wikilink").

A substantial fascinator is a fascinator of some size or bulk. Bigger
than a [barrette](barrette "wikilink"), modern fascinators are commonly
made with [feathers](feather "wikilink"), [flowers](flower "wikilink")
or [beads](bead "wikilink"). They need to be attached to the hair by a
[comb](comb "wikilink"), [headband](headband "wikilink") or
[clip](Hairpin_(fashion) "wikilink"). They are particularly popular at
premium horse-racing events, such as the [Grand
National](Grand_National "wikilink"), [Kentucky
Derby](Kentucky_Derby "wikilink") and the [Melbourne
Cup](Melbourne_Cup "wikilink"). Brides may choose to wear them as an
alternative to a bridal [veil](veil "wikilink") or hat, particularly if
their gowns are non-traditional.

At the [wedding of Prince William and Catherine
Middleton](wedding_of_Prince_William_and_Catherine_Middleton "wikilink")
in April 2011, various female guests arrived wearing fascinators. Among
them was [Princess Beatrice of
York](Princess_Beatrice_of_York "wikilink"), who wore a piece designed
by the Irish milliner [Philip Treacy](Philip_Treacy "wikilink"). The
unusual shape and colour caused quite a media stir and went on to become
an internet phenomenon with its own [Facebook](Facebook "wikilink")
page. Princess Beatrice used the publicity to auction it off on
[eBay](eBay "wikilink"), where it garnered 99,000 euros for charity.

In 2012 [Royal Ascot](Royal_Ascot "wikilink") announced that women will
have to wear hats, not fascinators, as part of a tightening of the dress
code in Royal Ascot's Royal Enclosure. In previous years female
racegoers were simply advised that "many ladies wear hats."

## Hatinator

The term hatinator, which emerged in the early 2010s, is used to
describe headgear that combines the features of a hat and a fascinator.
The hatinator is fastened on the head with a band like a fascinator, but
has the appearance of a hat, while a fascinator is much smaller and
normally does not go over the sides of the head. The particular style of
headgear favoured by [Catherine, Duchess of
Cambridge](Catherine,_Duchess_of_Cambridge "wikilink"), is sometimes
described as a hatinator.

## Gallery

<File:21> juli 2008 - Nationale Feestdag 122.jpg\|[Queen Mathilde of
Belgium](Queen_Mathilde_of_Belgium "wikilink") wearing a light green
fascinator <File:Prince> Beatrice with Dave Clark crop.jpg\|[Princess
Beatrice of York](Princess_Beatrice_of_York "wikilink") wearing a
black-and-white fascinator <File:Princess> Beatrice
Fascinator.jpg\|Drawing of Princess Beatrice's 2011 fascinator, by
Philip Treacy <File:Myer> AW13 (8549748729).jpg\|[Amber
Sherlock](Amber_Sherlock "wikilink"), (pictured third from left), at the
Myer Racing collection preview in 2013 <File:Black> Rainbow Hat
WM.jpg\|Hatinator

## See also

-   [Cocktail hat](Cocktail_hat "wikilink")
-   [Doll hat](Doll_hat "wikilink")

## References

## External links