The **Hardee hat**, also known as the **Model 1858 Dress Hat** and
sometimes nicknamed the "[Jeff Davis](Jefferson_Davis "wikilink")", was
the [regulation dress hat](Uniform_of_the_Union_Army "wikilink") for
enlisted men in the [Union Army](Union_Army "wikilink") during the
[American Civil War](American_Civil_War "wikilink"). The Hardee hat was
also worn by [Confederate](Confederate_States_Army "wikilink") soldiers.
However, most soldiers found the black felt hat to be too hot and heavy
and shunned its use, preferring a [forage cap](forage_cap "wikilink") or
[slouch hat](slouch_hat "wikilink"). However, the unadorned, plain and
often field-modified Hardee hat was worn by Union troops, especially in
the [Western
theater](Western_Theater_of_the_American_Civil_War "wikilink"). The
hardee hat was most famously worn and easily identified, as the hat worn
by the [Union Army](Union_Army "wikilink")'s [Iron
Brigade](Iron_Brigade "wikilink"), which became their trademark and were
popularly known, by the nickname, "The Black Hats".

The hat apparently was named after [William J.
Hardee](William_J._Hardee "wikilink"), a career officer in the U.S. Army
from 1838 until resigning his commission on January 31, 1861. Hardee was
Commandant of Cadets at [West Point](West_Point "wikilink") from 1856 to
1860. He was lieutenant colonel of the 1st U.S. Cavalry until just
before the war. In 1855, he published *Rifle and Light Infantry Tactics
for the Exercise and Manoeuvres of Troops When Acting as Light Infantry
or Riflemen*, popularly known as *Hardee's Tactics*, which became the
best-known drill manual of both sides of the Civil War. He joined the
[Confederate States Army](Confederate_States_Army "wikilink") in March
1861 and eventually became a lieutenant general and corps commander.

U.S. Army regulations specified that the hat should be adorned with a
brass hat device and a wool hat cord denoting the branch of service of
the wearer: sky blue for [infantry](infantry "wikilink"), scarlet for
[artillery](artillery "wikilink"), and gold for
[cavalry](cavalry "wikilink"). The brim was to be pinned up on the right
side for cavalrymen and artillerymen, and on the left for infantry
soldiers.

<File:William> J. Hardee portrait.jpg\|William J. Hardee with a Hardee
hat <File:Gen>. Robert Anderson - NARA - 526722.jpg\|General [Schuyler
Hamilton](Schuyler_Hamilton "wikilink") with a Hardee hat <File:Franz>
Sigel.jpg\|[Franz Sigel](Franz_Sigel "wikilink") with a Hardee hat
<File:US> Army Cavalry Sergeant 1866 (Bis).jpg\|1866 picture of Model
showing correct uniform of Company "A" 1st US Cavalry Sgt wearing Hardee
hat

## References

## External links

-   [Hardee hat as worn by Confederate
    soldiers](http://www.first-tennessee.co.uk/origphotos.htm)