---
title: Headband
permalink: /Headband/
---

A **headband** is a clothing accessory worn in the hair or around the
forehead, usually to hold hair away from the face or eyes. Headbands
generally consist of a loop of elastic material or a horseshoe-shaped
piece of flexible plastic or metal. They come in assorted shapes and
sizes and are used for both fashion and practical or utilitarian
purposes.

In the UK, horseshoe-shaped headbands are sometimes called "Alice bands"
after the headbands that Alice is often depicted wearing in *Through the
Looking-Glass*.



## Fashion

### Materials and uses

Rafael Nadal wearing green head band during a tennis match A headband
depicting the Tree of Currier House (Harvard College)

There are many materials used for headbands such as wood, leather,
plastic, metal, fabric, hemp, teeth, human and animal hair, bone, and
novelty materials. The leather headbands are usually glued onto a harder
plastic headband, or they are hand-stitched. Plastic headbands, which
are most common, can be wavy, straight or angled and come in many
colours. Metal can be used to form and support leather headbands.
Metal-only headbands may be plain or decorated, sometimes with precious
jewels. Fabric headbands are comfortable because they do not dig into
the head. They usually have an elastic band, so that the headband forms
to the head. Toothed headbands have comb-like teeth that are connected
to the top part of the headband. Their teeth ensure that the hair stays
in place.

Novelty headbands can be used for holidays and may have decorations
attached such as bunny ears, reindeer ears, Santa Claus hats and others.
Headbands are often part of a larger fashion statement â€” they can be
colour-coded and matched accordingly to one's outfit.
[Category:Headwear](/Category:Headwear "wikilink")
[Category:Accessories](/Category:Accessories "wikilink")
[Category:Sportswear](/Category:Sportswear "wikilink")