`of the `[`Greek`` ``fisherman's`` ``cap`](Greek_fisherman's_cap "wikilink")`.]]`

The "**rastacap**" or "**tam**" is a tall (sometimes depending on the
user's hair length), round, crocheted cap. It is most commonly
associated with the pat as a way for [Rastafari](Rastafari "wikilink")
(Rastas) and others with [dreadlocks](dreadlocks "wikilink") to tuck
their locks away, but may be worn for various reasons (such as
religious) by Rastas and non-Rastas. The cap is worn mostly by men. It
is sometimes erroneously referred to as a
"[Tam](Tam_o'_Shanter_(cap) "wikilink")" (or "tam"), that was loosely
ancestral to the rastacap. Other [Caribbean](Caribbean "wikilink") terms
for the rastacap include rastafar (sometimes with a silent terminal
*-r*), toppa\[h\] and simply cap or hat.

In construction, the rastacap is similar to the
[tuque](tuque "wikilink"), but much larger. Most commonly crocheted, the
hat can also be [knit](knit "wikilink"), [woven](woven "wikilink"),
[sewn](sewn "wikilink"), or constructed in a number of other ways.
Examples with sun-cured palm leaves woven into the hat exist; this
yields a semi-rigid design which a skilled islander can form rapidly.
Rastacaps range in size and shape, as well as uses. People with
dreadlocks and non-dreaded people alike wear rastacaps for fashion,
convenience, religion, socio-political statement, and a number of other
reasons. Some Rastas also wear rastacaps and other forms of headdress as
a religious headcovering. It may also be worn by health and food service
and heavy machinery workers with long hair, for workplace safety
reasons.

## References

## External links

-