`wearing a straw sailor in 1909]]`

A **sailor hat** is a brimmed [straw hat](straw_hat "wikilink") similar
to those historically worn by nineteenth century sailors before the
[sailor cap](sailor_cap "wikilink") became standard. It is very close in
appearance to the masculine [boater](boater "wikilink"), although
"sailors" as worn by women and children have their own distinct design,
typically flat-crowned, wide-brimmed and with a dark ribbon band
extending into streamers hanging off the brim. Such hats could also be
made in felt as an alternative to straw.

## Origins

The [sennit](Boater "wikilink") or straw hat formed part of the British
naval uniform from 1857 up until March 16 1921 when it was formally
discontinued by order. Sometimes worn with a black cover in bad weather
or a khaki cover on active service ashore, the sennet hat usually
included the ship's name on a tally band around the crown.

## Fashion

The "sailor" was a standard form of fashionable headgear for women and
children in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Children often wore
it with [sailor suits](sailor_suit "wikilink"). One 1870s variation on
the style was the Marin anglais bonnet, which added extra trimmings of
flowers and ribbons to the sailor hat form. In most decades since the
1870s the sailor, or variations thereof, has been in fashion, or a
staple form of headgear. One popular variation was the "short-back
sailor", distinguished by its large broad flat brim, narrowing sharply
(sometimes to nothing) in the back, and frequently worn at an upwards
tilt.

The sailor hat was a key part of [Chanel](Coco_Chanel "wikilink")'s
trademark 'little boy' look that she popularised in the 1920s and
revived in 1954 for her comeback collection.

## References