`sailor cap]]`

A **sailor cap** is a round, flat visorless hat worn by sailors in many
of the world's navies. A [tally](tally_(cap) "wikilink"), an inscribed
black silk ribbon, is tied around the base which usually bears the name
of a ship or a navy. Many navies (e.g. Germany) tie the tally at the
rear of the cap and let the two ends hang down to the shoulders as
decorative streamers. In the Royal Navy the tally is tied off in a bow
over the left ear and in the early 20th century it was customary when
going on shore leave to tie a small coin in the bow to make it stand
out. In wartime, as a security measure, many navies replace the name of
the ship with a generic title (e.g. "HMS" = "His/Her Majesty's Ship" in
the Royal Navy or "South African Navy"). The cap may be further
embellished with a [badge](badge "wikilink"),
[cockade](cockade "wikilink") or other accessory. Visorless caps of this
kind began to be worn in the mid 19th century.

The more rigid type of sailor hat with a wide, flat peak is also known
as square rig (this refers generally to a type of [sailor
uniform](sailor_uniform "wikilink")) cap or pork pie (not to be confused
with the brimmed [pork pie hat](pork_pie_hat "wikilink")). Until after
World War II it was customary in most navies to wear a removable white
cover over the dark blue cap in tropical or summer conditions only. This
has been retained but as the cap is now generally a formal or dress item
the white cover is worn all year around. The German Navy version of the
sailor cap has a raised front in contrast to the flat top favored by the
Royal Navy.

The sailor cap was first introduced in September 1811 as a part of the
uniform of the [Russian Navy](Russian_Navy "wikilink") (bezkozyrka,
[ru](Russian_language "wikilink"). бескозырка, non-peaked hat), at the
same time as an identical [forage cap](forage_cap "wikilink") was
adopted by the Russian Army. All ranks of the Russian navy of this
period wore military style uniforms and the *bezkozyrka* was a useful
development of the [peaked cap](peaked_cap "wikilink") in practical
application to marine conditions.

The French Navy's version of the sailor cap, with its distinctive red
pompom on top, was adopted about 1848. Worn initially as an ordinary
duty alternative for the formal leather hat with turned up side, the cap
has survived as a dress item until the present day. The Belgian Navy
adopted the same pattern of cap, but with light-blue pompom and trailing
ribbons, on 29 March 1939.

Known as the "flat hat" or "Pancake cap" the U.S. Navy's version of the
blue woolen sailor hat described above was first issued in 1852.
Generally superseded progressively by the white cotton hat of the
[working
uniform](Uniforms_of_the_United_States_Navy#Dungarees "wikilink") also
known as "Dixie hat" during World War II, the flat hat continued to be
issued but seldom worn without the full dress blues uniform, until
officially formally withdrawn off issue in April 1963.

[United States Navy](U.S._Navy "wikilink"),
[Bolivian](Bolivian_Naval_Force "wikilink"),
[Philippine](Philippine_Navy "wikilink"), and
[Venezuelan](Bolivarian_Navy_of_Venezuela "wikilink") sailors currently
wear a white canvas hat with an upright brim, often referred to as a
"Dixie cup" in reference to its similarity to the shape of a [common
disposable drinking cup](Paper_cup#Dixie_cups "wikilink"), or a "gob
hat" or cap. This hat was also worn by [Polish
Navy](Polish_Navy "wikilink") sailors before 1939—it was called the
"amerykanka" ("American hat") or "nejwihetka" (derived from the English
phrase "Navy hat").

In the [Royal Navy](Royal_Navy "wikilink"), round caps with a tally band
were being worn in the 1850s and were officially prescribed in the
"Uniform Regulations for Petty Officers, Seamen and Boys" of 1857.
Originally, the blue caps had a cover made from white [cotton
duck](cotton_duck "wikilink") for summer and tropical use, but in 1930,
a new cap with a permanent white duck crown was introduced, supplemented
by a redesigned blue cap in the following year. A 1936 recommendation
that the blue cap should be discontinued was not adopted and a
regulation of April 1940 stipulated that white caps were not to be worn
in "home waters" for the duration of the [Second World
War](Second_World_War "wikilink"). Blue caps were finally abolished in
1956.

## Images

<File:090420-N-8273J-198> China navy sailors.jpg\|China "square rig" or
"pork pie" hat <File:Norwegian> navy former private hat.png\|Norwegian
Navy cap <File:Jean-Bart> seaman Bastille Day 2008.jpg\|France "Bachi"
bonnet
[File:Czapka.marynarska.ORP.SĘP.JPG\|Polish](File:Czapka.marynarska.ORP.SĘP.JPG%7CPolish)
Navy cap <File:US> Navy 080923-N-4965F-009 Navy Region Hawaii Ceremonial
Guard forms up in preparation of a burial.jpg\|United States "dixie cup"
hat <File:Polish> destroyer's range-finder.JPG\|Polish sailors wearing
"dixie cups" <File:HMAS> Hobart seaman's cap.jpg\|Australian sailor in
1940 with the British pattern seaman's cap <File:US> Navy
090716-N-6770T-117 A Royal Thai Navy sailor stands in ranks beside his
U.S. Navy counterparts from the dock landing ship USS Harpers Ferry (LSD
49), the guided-missile frigate USS Crommelin (FFG 37), and the
guided-miss.jpg\|Royal Thai Navy sailors with sailor cap <File:US> Navy
071025-N-4965F-008 Sailors aboard British Royal Navy frigate HMS
Monmouth (F235) perform line handling duties as the ship moors pierside
Naval Station Pearl Harbor.jpg\|Royal Navy sailor with British seaman's
cap <File:The> Royal Canadian Navy during the Second World War
A3275.jpg\|World War II Royal Canadian Navy sailor, showing the British
pattern blue cap <File:Crew> HMCS Daerwood.png\|Royal Canadian Navy
sailors during World War II, with the white cap, worn in the summer or
in the tropics

## See also

-   [Sailor suit](Sailor_suit "wikilink")
-   [Pork pie hat](Pork_pie_hat "wikilink")

## References