**Stetson** is a brand of hat manufactured by the [John B. Stetson
Company](John_B._Stetson_Company "wikilink").

Founded in 1865, John B. Stetson Company began when the founder headed
west and created the original hat of the pioneering American West, the
“[Boss of the Plains](Boss_of_the_Plains "wikilink")”. This Western hat
would become the cornerstone of Stetson's hat business and is still in
production today.

Stetson eventually became the world's largest hat maker, producing more
than 3,300,000 hats a year in a factory spread over in
[Philadelphia](Philadelphia "wikilink"). In addition to its Western and
fashion hats, Stetson also produces fragrance, apparel, footwear,
eyewear, belts, bourbon and a range of other products evoking the
historic [American West](American_frontier "wikilink").

[Stetson University](Stetson_University "wikilink") and [Stetson
University College of Law](Stetson_University_College_of_Law "wikilink")
in Florida were named after John B. Stetson in 1899 for his
contributions to the school.

## Beginnings

[John B. Stetson](John_B._Stetson "wikilink") was born in 1830 in
Orange, New Jersey, where his father Stephen Stetson was a hatter. He
worked in his father's shop until he went West for his health.

## Prospector's hat

Stetson created a rugged hat for himself made from thick
[beaver](beaver "wikilink") [felt](felt "wikilink") while panning for
gold in Colorado. According to legend, Stetson invented the hat while on
a hunting trip while showing his companions how he could make cloth out
of fur without tanning. Fur felt hats are lighter, they maintain their
shape, and withstand weather and renovation better.

Stetson made an unusually large hat from felt he made from hides
collected on the trip, and wore the hat for the remainder of the
expedition. Although initially worn as a joke, Stetson soon grew fond of
the hat for its ability to protect him from the elements. It had a wide
brim, a high crown to keep an insulating pocket of air on the head, and
was used to carry water.

As their travels continued, a [cowboy](cowboy "wikilink") is said to
have seen J. B. Stetson and his unusual hat, rode up, tried the hat on
for himself, and paid Stetson for it with a [five dollar gold
piece](Half_Eagle "wikilink"), riding off with the first western Stetson
hat on his head.

## Boss of the Plains

Stetson’s western adventures came to an end in 1865. Stetson, now 35
years old, and in better health, returned east and established his own
hat firm in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, which produced high-quality hats
for outdoor use. After producing some initial designs based on popular
styles of the day, Stetson decided to create a hat based on his
experiences in the American West, which he called the "[Boss of the
Plains](Boss_of_the_Plains "wikilink")".

The original "Boss", manufactured by Stetson in 1865, was flat-brimmed,
had a straight-sided crown, with rounded corners. These lightweight,
waterproof hats were natural in color, with four-inch crowns and brims.
A plain hatband was fitted to adjust head size. The sweatband bore John
B. Stetson's name.

## Price and popularity

Stetson produced a very expensive hat. The cowboy riding the range
wearing the "'Boss of the Plains' hat showed the world that he was doing
well". "Within a decade the name John B. Stetson became synonymous with
the word 'hat' in every corner and culture of the West."

The shape of the hat's crown and brim were often modified by the wearer
for fashion and to protect against weather by being softened in hot
steam, shaped, and allowed to dry and cool. Felt tends to retain the
shape in which it dries. The high-crowned, wide-brimmed, soft-felt
western hats that followed are intimately associated with the American
cowboy image.

## Mass production

Stetson sent a sample hat to merchants throughout the Southwest with a
letter asking for a minimum order of a dozen “Boss of the Plains” hats.
The hat was an immediate success: in less than a year Stetson set up a
new factory in the outskirts of Philadelphia to handle his growing
business. By 1886, Stetson's hat company was the largest in the world,
and had mechanized the hat-making industry ("producing close to 2
million hats a year by 1906"). The Stetson Hat Co.ceased production in
1968 and licensed another hat company, but these hats still bear the
Stetson name with the hats being produced in St. Joseph, Missouri. Later
the license was transferred to another hat company in Texas. "Today's
[cowboy hat](cowboy_hat "wikilink") has remained basically unchanged in
construction and design since the first one was created in 1865 by J.B.
Stetson."

Stetson also produced “dress” hats, distinguished from “western” hats by
narrower brims and shorter crowns, but it was his “Boss of the Plains”
style hat and its many variants which fueled the company's growth and
fame.

## Singing cowboys and ten-gallon hats

, an early 20th-century movie star, wearing a ten-gallon hat\]\]In the
19th century and first half of the 20th century, a hat was an
indispensable item in every man's wardrobe. Stetson focused on
expensive, high-quality hats that represented both a real investment for
the working cowboy and statement of success for the city dweller.

Early on, Stetson hats became associated with legends of the West,
including “[Buffalo Bill](Buffalo_Bill "wikilink")”, [Calamity
Jane](Calamity_Jane "wikilink"), [Will Rogers](Will_Rogers "wikilink"),
and [Annie Oakley](Annie_Oakley "wikilink"). It is said that [George
Custer](George_Custer "wikilink") rode into the [Battle of Little Big
Horn](Battle_of_Little_Big_Horn "wikilink") wearing a Stetson. Later on,
[Western movie](Western_movie "wikilink") cowboys were quick to adopt
the Stetson; many were drawn to the largest, most flamboyant styles
available.

Texans were known for their preference for the "Ten Gallon" model.
According to Win Blevins' *Dictionary of the American West* (p388), the
term "ten-gallon" has nothing to do with the hat's liquid capacity, but
derives from the Spanish word *galón* (braid), ten indicating the number
of braids used as a hat band. However, an early Stetson advertising
image, a painting of a cowboy dipping his hat into a stream to provide
water for his horse, symbolized the cowboy hat as an essential part of a
[stockman](Cowman_(profession) "wikilink")’s gear and was later featured
inside every western style hat.

## Changing fashions

Stetson also produced women’s hats, operating a millinery department
from the 1930s to 1950s. Hat sales suffered during the Depression years,
but Stetsons remained ubiquitous until Americans' embrace of headwear
faded after WWII. At its peak Stetson had operations in Australia,
Brazil, Colombia, Finland, Guatemala, Ireland, Japan, Mexico, New
Zealand, Norway, South Africa and West Germany.

Stetson changed its business strategy in the early 1970s, closing its
Philadelphia factory in 1971 and continuing in the hat business through
licensing arrangements with a number of manufacturers.

Popular demand for western style hats spiked during the 1980s after the
success of Indiana Jones and Urban Cowboy movies. Both Western and Dress
hats continue to be important men’s accessories.

### Diversification

In the 1980s Stetson began to diversify, releasing the first Stetson
cologne in 1981 and Lady Stetson in 1986. Luggage, handbags, umbrellas
and scarves also carried the Stetson mark. Today, Stetson is available
in the US, Canada, Mexico and throughout Europe and Asia. The brand
currently carries western hat, fashion hat, fragrance, eyewear, apparel,
footwear, belt and accessories, and bourbon.

## Military and police uniforms

### United States

The hat was first sold in [Central City,
Colorado](Central_City,_Colorado "wikilink") in 1865 in a style called
the "Boss of the Plains." In some versions of the famous American folk
ballad "[Stagger Lee](Stagger_Lee_(song) "wikilink")", Billy Lyons is
killed by Stack A Lee over a Stetson hat. Troopers of modern-day US Army
cavalry regiments will often wear the stetson on ceremonial occasions in
place of the ACU patrol cap or beret.

The Homicide and Robbery Bureau of the Dallas Police used the Stetson
hat as a badge of office.

In addition, on April Fools' Day, 2011, the U.S. Army released a
humorous statement that the official black beret of the Army would be
replaced by Stetsons. The statement was supplemented by pictures of
soldiers with Stetsons photoshopped over their berets, including an Army
dog toting a Stetson.

### British paramilitary

The [Legion of Frontiersmen](Legion_of_Frontiersmen "wikilink") created
in 1905 in England also wore the Stetson.

### South African police

The [South African Constabulary](South_African_Constabulary "wikilink")
organised by [Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron
Baden-Powell](Robert_Baden-Powell,_1st_Baron_Baden-Powell "wikilink") in
1901 wore the Stetson.

### Canadian military

In the [Second Boer War](Second_Boer_War "wikilink"), the flat-brimmed
Stetson became the standard issue of the [2nd Canadian
Contingent](Canadian_Mounted_Rifles#Units_formed_for_the_Second_Boer_War "wikilink"),
becoming recognized throughout the [British
Empire](British_Empire "wikilink") as a symbol of
[Canada](Canada "wikilink"). Twelve hundred Canadian troops were part of
the South African Constabulary under the leadership of [Robert
Baden-Powell](Robert_Baden-Powell "wikilink"), and it was after seeing
these troops in action at the Relief of Mafeking that Baden-Powel
ordered 10,000 of these hats for the British Troops under his command.

### Canadian police

The [Royal Canadian Mounted
Police](Royal_Canadian_Mounted_Police "wikilink") (RCMP) [Red
Serge](Red_Serge "wikilink") [dress uniform](dress_uniform "wikilink")
includes a Stetson with a flat brim. The Stetson was first used
unofficially by the [North-West Mounted
Police](North-West_Mounted_Police "wikilink"), in place of the
traditional white [pith helmet](pith_helmet "wikilink"), not practical
for the Canadian West. The colour for the RCMP Stetson is sometimes
referred to as "Belgian Belly"; it is a reddish buff, pastel-like colour
of the underfur of the Belgian hare. It is also a very little-used
"second name" for the Stetson. Although called a Stetson, the hat type
should be considered as a [campaign hat](campaign_hat "wikilink").

The [Ontario Provincial Police](Ontario_Provincial_Police "wikilink")
also wore the Stetson (grey woven fabric) as part of their uniform from
1909 to 1930s and again from 1997 to 2009.

## See also

-   [Akubra](Akubra "wikilink")
-   [Boss of the Plains](Boss_of_the_Plains "wikilink")
-   [Campaign hat](Campaign_hat "wikilink")
-   [Cowboy hat](Cowboy_hat "wikilink")
-   [Tyrolean hat](Tyrolean_hat "wikilink")
-   [List of headgear](List_of_headgear "wikilink")
-   [Cap](Cap "wikilink")

## References

## Further reading

-   Bender, Texan Bix. (1994) *Hats & the cowboys who wear them.*
-   Carlson, Laurie. (1998) *Boss of the Plains, the hat that won the
    West*.
-   Reynolds, William and Rich Rand (1995) *The Cowboy Hat book.*
-   Snyder, Jeffrey B. (1997) *Stetson Hats and the John B. Stetson
    Company 1865–1970.*

## External links

-