, 46th Governor of Maryland (1908â€“1912), wearing a top hat\]\]

A **top hat**, **high hat**, **cylinder hat** or **topper** is a tall,
flat-crowned [hat](hat "wikilink") for men traditionally associated with
[formal wear](formal_wear "wikilink") in [Western dress
codes](Western_dress_codes "wikilink"), meaning [white
tie](white_tie "wikilink"), [morning dress](morning_dress "wikilink") or
[frock coat](frock_coat "wikilink"). The top hat, traditionally of black
[silk](silk "wikilink") or sometimes grey, came about perhaps inspired
by the [capotain](capotain "wikilink"), and replaced the
[tricorne](tricorne "wikilink") associated with the
[justaucorps](justaucorps "wikilink") [tailcoats](tailcoat "wikilink")
in [Western fashion](Western_fashion "wikilink") by the end of 18th
century. It has remained a formal [fashion
accessory](fashion_accessory "wikilink") ever since. A collapsible
variant of a top hat is known as an [opera hat](opera_hat "wikilink").

During the 19th century and early 20th century, it was the daily formal
wear hat of choice for the [upper](upper_class "wikilink") and [middle
classes](middle_class "wikilink"). This went on until the 1920s which
saw widespread introduction of [informal wear](informal_wear "wikilink")
with [suits](suit "wikilink") and less formal hats such as [bowler
hats](bowler_hat "wikilink"), [homburg hats](homburg_hat "wikilink") and
[fedoras](fedora "wikilink") also in established society. After [World
War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), white tie, morning dress and frock
coats along with their counterpart the top hat started to become
confined to [high society](High_society_(social_class) "wikilink"),
[politics](politics "wikilink") and international
[diplomacy](diplomacy "wikilink"), including at [United States
presidential
inaugurations](United_States_presidential_inauguration "wikilink"), the
last being worn at the
[inauguration](Inauguration_of_John_F._Kennedy "wikilink") of [John F.
Kennedy](John_F._Kennedy "wikilink") in 1961. Following the
[counterculture of the 1960s](counterculture_of_the_1960s "wikilink"),
its use declined further along with the disuse also of daily informal
hats by men.

Yet, along with traditional formal wear, the top hat continues to be
applicable for the most formal occasions, including
[weddings](wedding "wikilink"), [funerals](funeral "wikilink"), in
addition to certain [audiences](Audience_(meeting) "wikilink"),
[balls](Ball_(dance_party) "wikilink"), and [horse
racing](horse_racing "wikilink"), such as the Royal Enclosure of [Royal
Ascot](Royal_Ascot "wikilink") the Queen's Stand of [Epsom
Derby](Epsom_Derby "wikilink"). It also remains part of the formal dress
by those occupying prominent positions of certain traditional British
institutions, such as the [Bank of England](Bank_of_England "wikilink"),
certain [City](City_of_London "wikilink") [stock
exchange](stock_exchange "wikilink") officials, occasionally at the [Law
Courts](Law_Courts "wikilink") and [Lincoln's
Inn](Lincoln's_Inn "wikilink"), by judges of the Chancery Division and
[Queen's Counsel](Queen's_Counsel "wikilink"), by boy-choristers of
[King's College Choir](King's_College_Choir "wikilink"), as well as
[dressage](dressage "wikilink") [horseback
riders](horseback_riders "wikilink"), in addition to
[servants](servant "wikilink")' or
[doormen](Doorman_(profession) "wikilink")'s
[livery](livery "wikilink").

As part of traditional formal wear, in [popular
culture](popular_culture "wikilink") the top hat has been associated
with the upper class, and used by satirists and [social
critics](social_critic "wikilink") as a symbol of
[capitalism](capitalism "wikilink") or the world of business (one
current example is the [Monopoly Man](Monopoly_Man "wikilink")). The top
hat also forms part of the traditional dress of [Uncle
Sam](Uncle_Sam "wikilink"), a symbol of the United States, generally
striped in red, white and blue. The top hat is also associated with
[stage magic](magic_(illusion) "wikilink"), both as costume and
especially the use of [hat tricks](Hat-trick_(magic_trick) "wikilink"),
such as the famous "Pulling a Rabbit out of a Hat" trick dating back to
[Louis Comte](Louis_Comte "wikilink") who performed the trick in 1814.

## Name

The top hat is also known as a *beaver hat* or *silk hat*, in reference
to its material, as well as casually as *chimney pot hat* or *stove pipe
hat*.

## History

According to fashion historians, the top hat may have descended directly
from the [sugarloaf hat](Capotain "wikilink"); otherwise it is difficult
to establish provenance for its creation. Gentlemen began to replace the
[tricorne](tricorne "wikilink") with the top hat at the end of the 18th
century; a painting by [Charles
Vernet](Antoine_Charles_Horace_Vernet "wikilink") of 1796, *Un
Incroyable*, shows a French [dandy](dandy "wikilink") (one of the
*[Incroyables et
Merveilleuses](Incroyables_and_Merveilleuses "wikilink")*) with such a
hat. The first silk top hat in England is credited to George Dunnage, a
hatter from Middlesex, in 1793. The invention of the top hat is often
erroneously credited to a [haberdasher](haberdasher "wikilink") named
[John Hetherington](John_Hetherington "wikilink").

Within 30 years top hats had become popular with all social classes,
with even workmen wearing them. At that time those worn by members of
the upper classes were usually made of [felted](felt "wikilink") [beaver
fur](beaver_hat "wikilink"); the generic name "stuff hat" was applied to
hats made from various non-fur felts. The hats became part of the
uniforms worn by policemen and postmen (to give them the appearance of
authority); since these people spent most of their time outdoors, their
hats were topped with black [oilcloth](oilcloth "wikilink").

### 19th century

Between the latter part of 18th century and the early part of the 19th
century, felted beaver fur was slowly replaced by silk "hatter's plush",
though the silk topper met with resistance from those who preferred the
beaver hat.

The 1840s and the 1850s saw it reach its most extreme form, with
ever-higher crowns and narrow brims. The *stovepipe hat* was a variety
with mostly straight sides, while one with slightly convex sides was
called the "chimney pot". The style most commonly referred to as the
stovepipe was popularized in the United States by [Abraham
Lincoln](Abraham_Lincoln "wikilink") during his presidency; though it is
postulated that he may never have called it stovepipe himself, but
merely a silk hat or a plug hat. It is said that Lincoln would keep
important letters inside the hat. One of Lincoln's top hats is kept on
display at the [National Museum of American
History](National_Museum_of_American_History "wikilink") in Washington,
DC.

During the 19th century, the top hat developed from a fashion into a
symbol of urban respectability, and this was assured when [Prince
Albert](Albert,_Prince_Consort "wikilink") started wearing them in 1850;
the rise in popularity of the silk plush top hat possibly led to a
decline in beaver hats, sharply reducing the size of the [beaver
trapping](Beaver_pelt "wikilink") industry in North America, though it
is also postulated that the beaver numbers were also reducing at the
same time. Whether it directly affected or was coincidental to the
decline of the beaver trade is debatable.

[James Laver](James_Laver "wikilink") once observed that an assemblage
of "toppers" resembled factory chimneys and thus added to the mood of
the industrial era. In England, post-[Brummel](Beau_Brummel "wikilink")
dandies went in for flared crowns and swooping brims. Their counterparts
in France, known as the "[Incroyables](Incroyables "wikilink")", wore
top hats of such outlandish dimensions that there was no room for them
in overcrowded cloakrooms until the invention of the collapsible top
hat.

### 20th century

Until [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink") the top hat was maintained
as a standard item of formal outdoor wear by upper-class males for both
daytime and evening usage. Considerations of convenience and expense
meant however that it was increasingly superseded by soft hats for
ordinary wear. By the end of [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), it
had become a comparative rarity, though it continued to be worn
regularly in certain roles. In Britain these included holders of various
positions in the [Bank of England](Bank_of_England "wikilink") and City
stockbroking, and boys at some public schools. All the civilian members
of the Japanese delegation that signed the [Japanese Instrument of
Surrender](Japanese_Instrument_of_Surrender "wikilink") on 2 September
1945, wore top hats, reflecting common diplomatic practice at the time.

The top hat persisted in [politics](politics "wikilink") and
international [diplomacy](diplomacy "wikilink") for many years. In the
[Soviet Union](Soviet_Union "wikilink"), there was debate as to whether
its diplomats should follow the international conventions and wear a top
hat. Instead a [diplomatic uniform](diplomatic_uniform "wikilink") with
peaked cap for formal occasions was adopted. Top hats were part of
formal wear for U.S. presidential inaugurations for many years.
President [Dwight D. Eisenhower](Dwight_D._Eisenhower "wikilink")
spurned the hat for his inauguration, but John F. Kennedy, who was
accustomed to formal dress, brought it back for his in 1961. Ironically,
Kennedy delivered his forceful inaugural address hatless, reinforcing
the image of vigor he desired to project, and setting the tone for an
active administration to follow.

His successor, Lyndon B. Johnson, did not wear a top hat for any part of
his inauguration in 1965, and the hat has not been worn since for this
purpose.

In the United Kingdom, the post of Government Broker in the [London
Stock Exchange](London_Stock_Exchange "wikilink") that required the
wearing of a top hat in the streets of the [City of
London](City_of_London "wikilink") was abolished by the "[Big
Bang](Big_Bang_(financial_markets) "wikilink")" reforms of October 1986.
In the [British House of Commons](British_House_of_Commons "wikilink"),
a rule requiring a [Member of
Parliament](Member_of_Parliament "wikilink") who wished to raise a
[point of order](point_of_order "wikilink") during a
[division](Division_of_the_assembly "wikilink"), having to speak seated
with a top hat on, was abolished in 1998. Spare top hats were kept in
the chamber in case they were needed. The Modernisation Select Committee
commented that "This particular practice has almost certainly brought
the House into greater ridicule than almost any other".

Although [Eton College](Eton_College "wikilink") has long abandoned the
top hat as part of its uniform, top hats are still worn by
"[Monitors](School_prefect "wikilink")" at [Harrow
School](Harrow_School "wikilink") with their Sunday dress uniform. They
are worn by male members of the [British Royal
Family](British_Royal_Family "wikilink") on State occasions as an
alternative to military uniform, for instance, in the Carriage
Procession at the [Diamond
Jubilee](Diamond_Jubilee_of_Elizabeth_II "wikilink") in 2012. Top hats
may also be worn at some [horse racing](horse_racing "wikilink")
meetings, notably [The Derby](Epsom_Derby "wikilink") and [Royal
Ascot](Royal_Ascot "wikilink"). Top hats are worn at the [Tynwald
Day](Tynwald_Day "wikilink") ceremony and a few other formal occasions
in the [Isle of Man](Isle_of_Man "wikilink").

<File:Winston> Churchill verl sst das Geb ude der Admiralt t
(1912).jpg\|[Winston Churchill](Winston_Churchill "wikilink") in a
[frock coat](frock_coat "wikilink") with grey top hat. <File:JFK>
Inauguration from Capitol view.jpg\|The [Inauguration of John F.
Kennedy](Inauguration_of_John_F._Kennedy "wikilink") as seen from
behind. The few top hats in the crowd can be distinguished by the
shininess of the hat's flat crown <File:Lord> Grimthorpe.jpg\|[Edward
Beckett, 5th Baron
Grimthorpe](Edward_Beckett,_5th_Baron_Grimthorpe "wikilink") and others
at [Royal Ascot](Royal_Ascot "wikilink"), 2012

### 21st century

The modern standard top hat is a hard, black silk hat, with fur now
often used. The acceptable colors of hats are much as they have
traditionally been, with "white" hats (which are actually grey), a
daytime racing color, worn at the less formal occasions demanding a top
hat, such as [Royal Ascot](Royal_Ascot "wikilink"), or with a [morning
suit](morning_suit "wikilink"). In the U.S. top hats are worn widely in
coaching, a driven horse discipline, as well as for formal riding to
hounds.

The collapsible silk [opera](opera "wikilink") hat, or *crush hat*, is
still worn on occasions, and black in color if worn with evening wear as
part of [white tie](white_tie "wikilink"), and is still made by a few
companies, since the materials, satin or grosgrain silk, are still
available. The other alternative hat for eveningwear is the normal hard
shell.

In formal [academic dress](academic_dress "wikilink"), the Finnish and
Swedish [doctoral hat](doctoral_hat "wikilink") is a variant of the top
hat, and remains in use today.

The British-American musician [Slash](Slash_(musician) "wikilink") has
sported a top hat since he was in [Guns N'
Roses](Guns_N'_Roses "wikilink"), a look that has become iconic for him.
[Panic! at the Disco](Panic!_at_the_Disco "wikilink")'s [Brendon
Urie](Brendon_Urie "wikilink") is also a frequent wearer of top hats. He
has been known to wear them in previous live performances on their
Nothing Rhymes with Circus tour and in the music videos, "[The Ballad of
Mona Lisa](The_Ballad_of_Mona_Lisa "wikilink")" and "[I Write Sins Not
Tragedies](I_Write_Sins_Not_Tragedies "wikilink")".

The members of the "Inner Circle" of the [Punxsutawney,
Pennsylvania](Punxsutawney,_Pennsylvania "wikilink") Groundhog Club wear
top hats on February 2 of every year when they perform the [Groundhog
Day](Groundhog_Day "wikilink") ceremonies with [Punxsutawney
Phil](Punxsutawney_Phil "wikilink").

[Steampunk](Steampunk "wikilink") culture also incorporates the top hat
into accepted headgear choices, though top hats worn in such a context
are sometimes made of leather or similar materials and, now and then,
even have simulated [gears](gear "wikilink") or other adornments secured
to them.

A top hat, frequently colored red, white and blue, or with stars and
stripes similar to those on the American flag, is part of the regular
costume of [Uncle Sam](Uncle_Sam "wikilink"), a symbol of the United
States.

For satirists and political cartoonists, the top hat was a convenient
symbol of the [upper class](upper_class "wikilink"), business and
[capitalism](capitalism "wikilink"). A character wearing a top hat would
be instantly recognized by the viewer as a member of the
[oligarchy](oligarchy "wikilink"). The character [Rich Uncle
Pennybags](Rich_Uncle_Pennybags "wikilink") in the board game
[Monopoly](Monopoly_(game) "wikilink"), wears a top hat. In addition, a
top hat is one of the game's tokens, used by players to mark their
position as they progress around the board.

#### Freemasonry

[`Worshipful`` ``Master`](Worshipful_Master "wikilink")`Â BillÂ EdgertonÂ wearingÂ hisÂ traditionalÂ topÂ hat]]`

In [Freemasonry](Freemasonry "wikilink"), as practiced in North American
lodges, top hats are often associated with the position of [Worshipful
Master](Worshipful_Master "wikilink") as he is the only member allowed
the privilege of wearing a head covering to signify his leadership
within the lodge. However, the Master is not obliged to wear a top hat,
and can wear whatever type of hat he deems appropriate for the occasion.
This is because there are varying degrees of formality in different
Lodges, from formal wear to everyday dress. It is also common for a
Worshipful Master to receive top-hat-related trinkets and gifts on
either the day of his installation or as a going away present. In other
countries, especially in certain systems in Germany, top hats are worn
by all members of the lodge.

#### Judaism

In some [synagogues](synagogue "wikilink"), the president and honorary
officers may wear a top hat on [Shabbat](Shabbat "wikilink") or the
great festivals. The custom of wearing a top hat, or *tzylinder* in the
[Yiddish language](Yiddish_language "wikilink"), originated in
19th-century England, replacing the [wig](wig "wikilink") and [tricorn
hat](tricorn_hat "wikilink"). The custom became widespread in Europe
until [The Holocaust](The_Holocaust "wikilink"). In some traditional
[Sephardi](Sephardi "wikilink") synagogues, members of the congregation
may also wear top hats on special occasions. The custom is said to have
started at the [Bevis Marks Synagogue](Bevis_Marks_Synagogue "wikilink")
in London on a hot day, when the *[Chazzan](Hazzan "wikilink")* was
preparing for a service and decided that it was too hot to wear his wig,
throwing it out of the window in a fit of bad temper. He then found that
his tricorn hat was too big, as it had been made to fit over the wig,
and so wore his top hat instead.

## Description

, from: *The Comic History of Rome* by [Gilbert Abbott Ã
Beckett](Gilbert_Abbott_Ã _Beckett "wikilink"), a top hat is placed in a
deliberate [anachronism](anachronism "wikilink") on the head of the
Ancient Roman reformer [Tiberius
Gracchus](Tiberius_Gracchus "wikilink"), in order to compare him to 19th
Century British politicians.\]\]A [silk](silk "wikilink") top hat is
made from hatters' plush, a soft silk weave with a very long, defined
nap. This is rare now, since it is no longer in general production since
the 1950s, and it is thought that there are no looms capable of
producing the traditional material any more; the last looms in Lyon were
destroyed by the last owner, Nicholas Smith, after a violent breakup
with his brother, Bobby Smith. The standard covering is now fur plush or
*melusine* as (the London hat merchant) Christys' calls it. A grey flat
fur felt top hat is the popular alternative.

It is common to see top hats in stiff wool felt and even soft wool
though these are not considered on the same level as the silk or fur
plush or grey felt varieties. The standard crown shape nowadays is the
'semi-bell crown'; 'full bell crowns' and 'stovepipe' shaped toppers are
rarer.

Because of the rarity of vintage silk hats, and the expense of modern
top hats, the vintage/antique market is very lively, with models in
wearable condition typically hard to find; price often varies with size
(larger sizes are typically more expensive) and condition.

### Construction

In the past, top hats were made by
[blocking](Blocking_(textile_arts) "wikilink") a single piece of wool or
fur felt and then covering the shell with fur plush. Since the invention
of silk plush a new method using
*[gossamer](Gossamer_(fabric) "wikilink")* was invented and used up to
the present day though the older method is more common for toppers made
today.

A town-weight silk top hat is made by first blocking two pieces of
gossamer (or *goss* for short), which is made of a sheet of
[cheesecloth](cheesecloth "wikilink") that has been coated with a
[shellac](shellac "wikilink") and [ammonia](ammonia "wikilink") solution
and left to cure for 5 months on a wooden frame, on a wooden top hat
block (which is made of several interconnecting pieces like a puzzle so
the block can be removed from the shell, as the opening is narrower than
tip of the crown) to form the shell. After the shell has rested for a
week in the block, the block is removed and the brim (made of several
layers of goss to give it strength) is attached to the crown. The shell
is coated with a layer of shellac varnish and also left for a further
week. The silk plush is then cut to the correct pattern. The top and
side pieces are sewn together; the side piece having an open diagonal
seam. It is then eased over the shell carefully and then ironed (the
heat of the iron melting the shellac for the plush to stick to it). The
upper brim is also covered with a piece of silk plush or with silk
petersham (a ribbed silk). The underbrim is covered with merino cloth.
After the hat has fully rested, the brim is curled and bound with silk
grosgrain ribbon, and a hat band (either silk grosgrain with or without
a bow, or a black wool mourning band without a bow) is installed.
Finally, the lining and the leather sweatband are carefully
hand-stitched in.

The construction can vary; reinforced toppers sometimes called
"country-weight" included greater layers goss used to provide a
strengthened hat that was traditionally suitable for riding and hunting,
though it may not always conform to modern safety standards.

## Opera hat

On May 5, 1812, a London hatter called Thomas Francis Dollman patented a
design for "an elastic round hat" supported by ribs and springs. His
patent was described as:

`}}`

Some sources have taken this to describe an early folding top hat,
although it is not explicitly stated whether Dollman's design was
specifically for male or female headgear. Dollman's patent expired in
1825. In France, around 1840, Antoine Gibus's design for a spring-loaded
collapsible top-hat proved so popular that hats made to it became known
as *gibus*. They were also often called *opera hats* due to the common
practice of storing them in their flattened state under one's seat at
the opera, though the term can also refer to any tall formal men's hat.
The characteristic snapping sound heard upon opening a gibus suggested a
third name, the *chapeau claque*, "claque" being the French word for
"slap".

## Gallery

<File:Stockholms> mode-journal- Tidskrift fÃ¶r den eleganta werlden 1847,
illustration nr 2.jpg\|Top hats in the 1840s. Swedish Fashion plate from
1847 [File:AtatÃ¼rk](File:AtatÃ¼rk) in white tie.jpg\|[Mustafa Kemal
AtatÃ¼rk](Mustafa_Kemal_AtatÃ¼rk "wikilink") wearing a top hat and [white
tie](white_tie "wikilink"), 1925
<File:TPainVMASept08.jpg%7CContemporary> [hip-hop](hip-hop "wikilink")
musician [T-Pain](T-Pain "wikilink") wearing a blue-and-white striped
top hat at the [Video Music Awards](Video_Music_Awards "wikilink") in
2008 <File:King> Magic.jpg\|A [stage magician](stage_magic "wikilink")
using a top hat as a prop <File:Leather> top hat box (ca 1910).jpg\|Hat
box <File:Paul> Hoeniger Cafe Josty.jpg\|A customer wearing a top hat in
Paul Hoeniger's depiction of Berlin's [CafÃ©
Josty](CafÃ©_Josty "wikilink"), 1890 <File:Grey> top hat by Scotts Ltd of
Old Bond Street, London, with hatbox, 1950.jpg\|Grey top hat

## See also

-   [Cap](Cap "wikilink")
-   [Gat (hat)](Gat_(hat) "wikilink")
-   [List of headgear](List_of_headgear "wikilink")
-   [Shako](Shako "wikilink"), a tall, cylindrical military cap

## References

## Further reading

-   [Steinberg, Neil](Neil_Steinberg "wikilink"), *Hatless Jack: The
    President, the Fedora and the Death of the Hat*, 2005, Granta Books

## External links

-   [britishpathe.com](http://www.britishpathe.com/record.php?id=47146),
    vintage footage of how silk top hats are made by Patey.
-   [Guide to Buying a Top
    Hat](https://chwolfenbloode.wordpress.com/2009/05/15/guide-to-buying-a-top-hat/)
    by Charles Rupert Tsua