The **tricorne** or **tricorn** is a style of [hat](hat "wikilink") that
was popular during the 18th century, falling out of style by 1800,
though actually not called a "tricorne" until the mid-19th century.
During the 18th century, hats of this general style were referred to as
"cocked hats". At the peak of its popularity, the tricorne varied
greatly in style and size, and was worn not only by the aristocracy, but
also as common civilian dress, and as part of military and naval
[uniforms](uniform "wikilink"). Typically made from animal fiber, the
more expensive being of beaver-hair felt and the less expensive of wool
felt, the hat's most distinguishing characteristic was that three sides
of the brim were turned up (cocked) and either pinned, laced, or
buttoned in place to form a triangle around the crown. The style served
two purposes: first, it allowed stylish gentlemen to show off the most
current fashions of their wigs, and thus their social status; and
secondly, the cocked hat, with its folded brim, was much smaller than
other hats and therefore could be more easily tucked under an arm when
going inside a building, where social etiquette dictated that a
gentleman should remove his hat. Tricornes with laced sides could have
the laces loosened and the sides dropped down to provide better
protection from the weather, sun, and rain.

Tricornes had a rather broad [brim](brim_(hat) "wikilink"), pinned up on
either side of the head and at the back, producing a triangular shape.
The hat was typically worn with one point facing forward, though it was
not at all unusual for soldiers, who would often rest a rifle or musket
on their left shoulder, to wear the tricorne pointed above their left
eyebrow to allow better clearance. The
[crown](Hat#Parts_of_a_hat "wikilink") is low, unlike the [steeple
hats](Capotain "wikilink") worn by the [Puritans](Puritans "wikilink")
or the [top hat](top_hat "wikilink") of the 19th century.

Tricornes ranged from the very simple and cheap to the extravagant,
occasionally incorporating [gold](gold "wikilink") or
[silver](silver "wikilink") [lace](lace "wikilink") trimming and
[feathers](feathers "wikilink"). In addition, military and naval
versions usually bore a [cockade](cockade "wikilink") or other national
emblem at the front. This style of hat remains in use in a number of
countries to the present day as an item of [ceremonial
dress](ceremonial_dress "wikilink").

## History

The tricorne appeared as a result of the evolution of the broad-brim
round hat used by Spanish soldiers in [Flanders](Flanders "wikilink")
during the 17th century. By pledging (binding) the brims, a triangular
shape was obtained. This shape was favored by
[Spanish](Spain "wikilink") soldiers, as when standing at arms their
muskets could be held at their shoulders right or left without hitting
the hat brim. [War broke out](War_of_Devolution "wikilink") between
France and Spain in 1667 over the [Spanish
Netherlands](Spanish_Netherlands "wikilink"), and during the subsequent
struggle its use spread to the French armies. The style was brought back
to France, where its usage spread to the French population and the royal
court of King [Louis XIV](Louis_XIV "wikilink"), who made it fashionable
throughout Europe, both as a civilian and military wear. By the end of
the 17th century, the tricorne was popular in both civilian fashion and
in military uniforms. They remained one of the predominant European
styles of hat throughout the 18th century. In the United States, only
the [first five
Presidents](List_of_Presidents_of_the_United_States#List_of_presidents "wikilink"),
from [George Washington](George_Washington "wikilink") to [James
Monroe](James_Monroe "wikilink"), wore this style of hat according to
the [fashion of the 18th
century](1775–1795_in_fashion#Men's_fashion "wikilink"). James Monroe
earned the nickname "The Last Cocked Hat" because of this.

The tricorne quickly declined in use at the end of the 18th century. It
evolved into the [bicorne](bicorne "wikilink"), which was widely used by
military officers in Europe from the 1790s until [World War
I](World_War_I "wikilink"), not completely fading out of style until
[World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"). For enlisted soldiers, the
tricorne was replaced by the [shako](shako "wikilink") at the turn of
the 19th century, which had become the new dominant style of military
headgear from 1800 on. Also at the turn of the 19th century, as the
fashionable hat for civilian men, the tricorne was overtaken by the [top
hat](top_hat "wikilink"). In 1917, the [Women's Royal Naval
Service](Women's_Royal_Naval_Service "wikilink") introduced a smaller,
modernised version of the tricorne for female officers.

## Modern usage and legacy

Tricornes survive today as part of the traditional dress of the [Chelsea
Pensioners](Chelsea_Pensioner "wikilink") (UK) and the [Old Guard Fife
and Drum Corps](Old_Guard_Fife_and_Drum_Corps "wikilink") of the United
States Army, and the distinctive hat of the Spanish [Guardia
Civil](guardia_Civil_(Spain) "wikilink"), called a *tricornio* in
Spanish, originates from the tricorne. In the UK, a black feathered
tricorne hat is part of the ceremonial dress of most [Lord
Mayors](Lord_Mayor "wikilink"); at the annual [Lord Mayor's
Show](Lord_Mayor's_Show "wikilink") in November, the newly elected [Lord
Mayor of the City of
London](Lord_Mayor_of_the_City_of_London "wikilink") can usually be seen
enthusiastically waving his tricorne at the crowds. In the British
Parliament until recently, both the [Lord
Chancellor](Lord_Chancellor "wikilink") and the [Speaker of the House of
Commons](Speaker_of_the_House_of_Commons_(United_Kingdom) "wikilink")
used to carry plain black tricornes as part of their formal dress each
day when on duty; only on rare occasions was it worn (on top of the full
bottomed wig): by the Lord Chancellor when acting as a [Lord
Commissioner](Lord_Commissioner "wikilink") of the Sovereign, and by the
Speaker when rebuking a Member at the Bar of the House. During the
Introduction Ceremony, new members of the [House of
Lords](House_of_Lords "wikilink") were required them to doff (remove and
replace) a tricorne hat three times before the Lord Chancellor; however,
hats were removed from the ritual in 1998.

In the United States, the tricorne is associated with the [American
Revolution](American_Revolution "wikilink") and American
[Patriots](Patriot_(American_Revolution) "wikilink") of that era,
especially [Minutemen](Minutemen_(militia) "wikilink") (militia members
of the [American Colonies](American_Colonies "wikilink")). Participants
in reenactment events often don tricornes, and they also can be seen in
sports culture as worn by fans of teams with Revolutionary names, such
as the [New England Patriots](New_England_Patriots "wikilink") (an
[American football](American_football "wikilink") team), the [New
England Revolution](New_England_Revolution "wikilink") (a [Major League
Soccer](Major_League_Soccer "wikilink") team), the [United States men's
national soccer
team](United_States_men's_national_soccer_team "wikilink"), the
[University of Massachusetts
Amherst](University_of_Massachusetts_Amherst "wikilink"), and the
[George Washington University](George_Washington_University "wikilink").
The [Tea Party movement](Tea_Party_movement "wikilink") uses the
tricorne as an icon to associate itself with the American Revolution.

In [Spain](Spain "wikilink") the traditional headdress of the [Guardia
Civil](Guardia_Civil "wikilink"), the oldest law enforcement agency
covering the whole country, is the *tricornio* hat, originally a
tricorne. Its use now is reserved for parades or ceremonies. The Royal
Corps of Halberdiers within the [Spanish Royal
Guard](Spanish_Royal_Guard "wikilink") wear blue and white with a silver
ribbon tricorne as part of their formal dress.

In [France](France "wikilink"), synagogue officiants (usually not
rabbis), wear the tricorne on formal occasions. In the French navy and
air force, tricornes are still worn by women as a piece of uniform.

The tricorne is a key feature in the [University of
Minho](University_of_Minho "wikilink")'s academic dress, in Portugal.
Its origins are as far as 18th century, as being the academic dress of
Colégio de Estudos Superiores de S. Paulo, as depicted by tile panels in
the [Archbishop's Palace of
Braga](Archbishop's_Palace_of_Braga "wikilink") (now Rectorate of the
University of Minho). Designated by "Tricórnio" (Portuguese for
"tricorne"), this academic dress was redesigned and officially set 1989.

In Canada, the tricorne is part of the ceremonial wear of the Speakers,
both in the federal Parliament and in some provincial legislatures. It
is also part of the ceremonial dress for justices of the Supreme Court
of Canada.

In 1981 the milliner [John Boyd](John_Boyd_(Milliner) "wikilink") made
the famous pink tricorne hat for [Diana, Princess of
Wales](Diana,_Princess_of_Wales "wikilink"). This style became known as
the "Lady Di" design and was copied worldwide.

## Gallery

<File:Guardia> Civil a caballo Dos de Mayo 2008 n5.jpg\|Horse Guard of
the [Guardia Civil](Guardia_Civil "wikilink") wearing the traditional
tricorne during a ceremony in [Madrid](Madrid "wikilink"),
[Spain](Spain "wikilink") <File:Peter> the Great Reenactor.jpg\|[Peter
the Great](Peter_the_Great "wikilink")
[reenactor](Historical_reenactment "wikilink") wearing a tricorne hat in
[Saint Petersburg](Saint_Petersburg "wikilink"),
[Russia](Russia "wikilink") <File:Louis> XIV 1685 Best.jpg\|Figure of
[Louis XIV](Louis_XIV "wikilink") c. 1685 <File:02> 178 Vinkhuijzen Book
illustrations of Historical description of the clothes and weapons of
Russian troops.jpg\|Russian soldier, c. 1700 <File:900-231> Herzog Carl
Alexander.jpg\|[Charles
Alexander](Charles_Alexander,_Duke_of_Württemberg "wikilink"), c.
1733–1737 <File:1st> Viscount Gage.jpg\|[Thomas
Gage](Thomas_Gage,_1st_Viscount_Gage "wikilink") in 1743 <File:Frederic>
II de prusse.jpg\|[Frederick the Great](Frederick_the_Great "wikilink")
wearing a tricorne, c. 1750 <File:Catherine> II tricorne.jpg\|[Catherine
the Great](Catherine_the_Great "wikilink"), c. 1760 <File:John> Trumbull
- The Surrender of Lord Cornwallis at Yorktown, October 19, 1781 -
1832.4 - Yale University Art
Gallery.jpg\|[Trumbull's](John_Trumbull "wikilink") depiction of the
[1781 surrender](Siege_of_Yorktown "wikilink") of [Lord
Cornwallis](Lord_Cornwallis "wikilink") at Yorktown <File:Carlos> III
cazador.jpg\|[Charles III of Spain](Charles_III_of_Spain "wikilink"), c.
1786–88 <File:James> Lowther Vanity Fair 24 October 1906.jpg\|The
British [Speaker of the House of
Commons](Speaker_of_the_House_of_Commons_(United_Kingdom) "wikilink")
carrying his tricorne, 1906. <File:Women's> Royal Naval Service.
November 1942, Admiralty. Uniforms of the WRNS. A12614 2.jpg\|The
[Women's Royal Naval Service](Women's_Royal_Naval_Service "wikilink")
modernised version of the tricorne in 1942. <File:Chelsea> Pensioners
MOD 45155509.jpg\|[Chelsea Pensioners](Chelsea_pensioner "wikilink")
raise their tricornes on Founder's Day. <File:Ken> Foster
crop.jpg\|[Lord Mayor of Plymouth](Lord_Mayor_of_Plymouth "wikilink"),
2009 <File:Seaton> Town Cryer - panoramio.jpg\|The [town
crier](town_crier "wikilink") of [Seaton](Seaton,_Devon "wikilink") in
[Devon](Devon "wikilink"), 2013.

## See also

-   [Bicorne](Bicorne "wikilink")
-   [List of hats and headgear](List_of_hats_and_headgear "wikilink")
-   [Beaver hat](Beaver_hat "wikilink")
-   [Chapeau](Chapeau "wikilink")
-   [Cap](Cap "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-