A **turban** (from [Persian](Persian_language "wikilink") دولبند‌,
*dulband*; via [Middle French](Middle_French "wikilink") *turbant*) is a
type of [headwear](headwear "wikilink") based on cloth winding.
Featuring many variations, it is worn as customary headwear by people of
various cultures. Communities with prominent turban-wearing traditions
can be found in the [Indian
subcontinent](Indian_subcontinent "wikilink"), [Southeast
Asia](Southeast_Asia "wikilink"), the [Arabian
Peninsula](Arabian_Peninsula "wikilink"), the [Middle
East](Middle_East "wikilink"), [Central Asia](Central_Asia "wikilink"),
[North Africa](North_Africa "wikilink"), [West
Africa](West_Africa "wikilink"), and the [Horn of
Africa](Horn_of_Africa "wikilink").

A **keski** is a type of turban - a long piece of cloth roughly half the
length of a traditional "single turban", but not cut and sewn to make a
double-width "Double Turban" (or **Double Patti**).

Wearing turbans is common among [Sikhs](Sikh "wikilink"), including
women. The headgear also serves as a religious observance, including
among [Shia Muslims](Shia_Islam "wikilink"), who regard turban-wearing
as *Sunnah Mu'akkadah* (confirmed tradition).

The turban is also the traditional headdress of
[Sufi](Sufism "wikilink") scholars. Additionally, turbans have often
been worn by nobility, regardless of religious background. They are also
sometimes donned to protect hair or as a headwrap for women following
cancer treatments.

## History

The origins of turbans are uncertain. Some of the ancient civilizations
such as those of [Ancient India](Ancient_India "wikilink"),
[Mesopotamia](Mesopotamia "wikilink"), Sumerian and Babylonian evidently
used turbans. A style of turban called a *phakeolis* continued to be
worn in that region by soldiers of the
[Byzantine](Byzantine_Empire "wikilink") army in the period 400–600, as
well as by Byzantine civilians as depicted in Greek frescoes from the
10th century in the province of [Cappadocia](Cappadocia "wikilink") in
modern Turkey, where it was still worn by their Greek-speaking
[descendants](Cappadocian_Greeks "wikilink") in the early 20th century.
The Islamic prophet, Muhammad, who lived 570–632, is believed to have
worn a turban in white, the most holy colour. Shiah clergies today wear
white turbans unless they are descendants of prophet Muhammad or
[Sayyid](Sayyid "wikilink"), in which case they wear a black turban.
Many Muslim men choose to wear green, because it represents paradise,
especially among followers of [Sufism](Sufism "wikilink"). In parts of
North Africa, where blue is common, the shade of a turban can signify
the tribe of the wearer.

<File:Shambhuraje1.jpg%7CThe> [Maratha
Chattrapati](Maratha_Empire "wikilink") [Sambhaji](Sambhaji "wikilink"),
wearing a Turban, jeweled with gemstones. <File:Aurangzeb> in old age
2.jpg\|The [Mughal Emperor](Mughal_Emperor "wikilink")
[Aurangzeb](Aurangzeb "wikilink") wearing a Turban and its ornaments.
<File:Sarayi> Album 10a.jpg\|Sultan [Mehmed II](Mehmed_II "wikilink")
wearing a Turban. <File:Babur> and Humayun.jpg\|[Mughal
Emperor](Mughal_Emperor "wikilink") [Babur](Babur "wikilink") and his
heir [Humayun](Humayun "wikilink") wearing Turbans.
<File:EmperorSuleiman.jpg>\|[Suleiman
I](Suleiman_the_Magnificent "wikilink") wearing a large Turban.
<File:II> Selim.jpg\|[Selim II](Selim_II "wikilink") wearing the Ottoman
imperial Turban. <File:Muslims> wearing Emamah 2.jpg\|thumb\|Muslims
wearing Emamah 2 <File:Sultan> Mohamoud Ali Shire
2.jpg\|\|[Somali](Somali_people "wikilink") [Sultan](Sultan "wikilink")
[Mohamoud Ali Shire](Mohamoud_Ali_Shire "wikilink") of the Warsangali
Sultanate wearing a turban, 1905.

## National styles

Contemporary turbans come in many shapes, sizes and colours. Turban
wearers in [North Africa](North_Africa "wikilink"), the [Horn of
Africa](Horn_of_Africa "wikilink"), the [Middle
East](Middle_East "wikilink"), [Central Asia](Central_Asia "wikilink"),
[South Asia](South_Asia "wikilink"), and [Philippines
(Sulu)](Sulu_Archipelago "wikilink") usually wind it anew for each
wearing, using long strips of cloth. The cloth is usually under five
meters in length. Some elaborate South Asian turbans may also be
permanently formed and sewn to a foundation. Turbans can be very large
or quite modest depending upon region, culture, and religion.

Traditionally, *turban* has been the name of a type of headwear worn by
women in Western countries. The wearing of such turbans by women in
Western societies is less common than it was earlier in the 20th
century. They are usually sewn to a foundation, so that they can be
donned or removed easily.

### Horn of Africa

Turbans are commonly worn in the [Horn of
Africa](Horn_of_Africa "wikilink") by Muslim clerics, as well as
[Ethiopian Orthodox
Christian](Ethiopian_Orthodox_Tewahedo_Church "wikilink") priests. The
headwrap has a long presence in the region, where it was frequently
sported by Sultans, Wazirs, and other [aristocratic and
court](Somali_aristocratic_and_court_titles "wikilink") officials. Among
these nobles are the [Somali](Somali_people "wikilink") Sultans
[Mohamoud Ali Shire](Mohamoud_Ali_Shire "wikilink") of the Warsangali
Sultanate, [Osman Mahamuud](Osman_Mahamuud "wikilink") of the
[Majeerteen Sultanate](Majeerteen_Sultanate "wikilink"), and [Yusuf Ali
Kenadid](Yusuf_Ali_Kenadid "wikilink") and [Ali Yusuf
Kenadid](Ali_Yusuf_Kenadid "wikilink") of the [Sultanate of
Hobyo](Sultanate_of_Hobyo "wikilink"). Prominent historical Islamic
leaders in the region that are known to have worn turbans include Sheikh
[Abadir Umar Ar-Rida](Abadir_Umar_Ar-Rida "wikilink").

### Arabian Peninsula

`Arab poet]]`

In most countries of the [Arabian
peninsula](Arabian_peninsula "wikilink"), a plain or checkered scarf
(called *[keffiyeh](keffiyeh "wikilink")*, *ghutrah*, *shumagh* or
*chefiyah*), not usually described as a turban is often worn, though the
Arabic *[Emamah](Emamah "wikilink")* tradition remains strong in
[Oman](Oman "wikilink") (see Sultan [Qaboos of
Oman](Qaboos_of_Oman "wikilink")), [Sudan](Sudan "wikilink") and some
parts of the Arabian peninsula. The colored turban, *Ghabanah*, is a
common inherited cultural turban in the regions of
[Hijaz](Hijaz "wikilink"), and it still the inhabitants costume of
[Mecca](Mecca "wikilink"), [Madinah](Madinah "wikilink") and
[Jeddah](Jeddah "wikilink") in particular. *Ghabanah* is the heritage
uniform headwear for traders and the general community categories of the
prestigious and middle-class, with the exception of religious scholars
who have had their special turbans distinctiveness predominately white.
The Hijazi turbans with different shapes are the extension of the turban
of [Islamic prophet](Islamic_prophet "wikilink")
[Muhammad](Muhammad "wikilink") who lived in [Mecca](Mecca "wikilink")
and [Madinah](Madinah "wikilink"). There are several types of
*Ghabanah*, perhaps the most famous is the yellow (Halabi), that made in
[Aleppo](Aleppo "wikilink"), that characterized by different
inscriptions, and wrapped on a dome-like hollow
[taqiyah](Taqiyah_(cap) "wikilink") or a Turkish [fez](fez "wikilink")
or [kalpak](kalpak "wikilink") cap. Colorful turbans called *Masar* are
the national headwear costume in [Oman](Oman "wikilink"), and also are
common in some regions in south of [Yemen](Yemen "wikilink") and
[Hadhramaut](Hadhramaut "wikilink"). Moreover, the white *ghutrah* or
*shumagh* are commonly wrapped in *Hamdaniyah* style, which is also the
shape of turbans in the [United Arab
Emirates](United_Arab_Emirates "wikilink").

### Afghanistan

`Lungee presentation]]`

Turbans are part of the national dress in
[Afghanistan](Afghanistan "wikilink"). They are used more widely here
than elsewhere in the Muslim world, and are worn in a wide range of
styles and colours. In the country's south-east, turbans are wrapped
loosely and largely, whereas in [Kabul](Kabul "wikilink") the garment
tends to be smaller and tighter. In traditional Afghan society, a
related piece of extra cloth called a *patu* serves practical purposes,
such as for wrapping oneself against the cold, to sit on, to tie up an
animal or to carry water in the cap. Different ethnic groups in
Afghanistan wear different lungees with different patterns, way of
styling it, fabric, stripes, lengths and colouration. Males of all
ethnic backgrounds generally avoid wearing bright-coloured turbans that
draw attention to oneself and prefer wearing simple colors that are
white, off white, gray, dark blue and black.

### Bangladesh

In [Bangladesh](Bangladesh "wikilink"), the turban is known as *pagri*,
or *fagri* in [Chittagong](Chittagong_Division "wikilink") and
[Sylhet](Sylhet_Division "wikilink"). The pagri is worn by religious
leaders and preachers of [Islam](Islam "wikilink"). The most common
colour worn is white, and generally it is the [Sufis](Sufi "wikilink")
that wear green turbans. It is also worn by elders in rural areas as a
symbol of honour and respect.

### Myanmar

In [Myanmar](Myanmar "wikilink"), the turban is referred to as a *[gaung
baung](gaung_baung "wikilink")*. There are several regional styles worn.

### Malaysia

In Malaysia, Sikhs wear turbans. Turbans are holy items to them.

### India

`i `*`paggar`*` style of turban.]]`

In [India](India "wikilink"), the turban is referred to as a *pagri*,
meaning the [headdress](headdress "wikilink") that is worn by men and is
manually tied. There are several styles, which are specific to the
wearer's region or religion, and they vary in shape, size and colour.
For example, the [Mysore Peta](Mysore_Peta "wikilink"), the [Marathi
pheta](Pheta_(turban) "wikilink"), [Puneri
Pagadi](Puneri_Pagadi "wikilink") and the [Sikh
Dastar](Dastar "wikilink") (see [below](#Sikh_turbans "wikilink")). The
pagri is a symbol of honour and respect everywhere it is worn. It is a
common practice to honour important guests by offering them one to wear.

Colours are often chosen to suit the occasion or circumstance: for
example saffron, associated with [valour](valour "wikilink") or
sacrifice (martyrdom), is worn during rallies; white, associated with
[peace](peace "wikilink"), is worn by elders; and pink, associated with
spring, is worn during that season or for marriage ceremonies.

Navy blue is a color common more to the Sikh
[Nihangs](Nihang "wikilink"), it signifies war and service, while black
is associated with resistance, orange with sacrifice and martyrdom, and
white with wisdom, old age, death, or peace; however during times of
peace or rallies for peace people will usually be in war gear (i.e.
blue) white only has the association.

### Indonesia

In Java, the turban-styled headdress for men is traditionally called
iket. It literally means to tie, the main way to attach the fabric over
the head of the wearer. It is made of a square or rectangular
[batik](batik "wikilink") cloth that is folded diagonally to form a
triangle. Although there are different ways of folding and tying the
fabric over the head, and therefore different shapes of iket, they can
in general show the social level of the wearer and the area of origin.
Its origin is not yet clearly identified, however many sources seemed to
conclude that the Javanese might be influenced by turban-wearing
[Gujarati](Gujarati_people "wikilink") traders who came to Indonesia
more than 500 years ago.

In [East Java](East_Java "wikilink"), the headdress is still made in
traditional way and it is called udeng. In other parts of Java, for
practicality the iket has developed into fixed-form headdresses, called
[blangkon](blangkon "wikilink") in [Central
Java](Central_Java "wikilink") and bendo in [West
Java](West_Java "wikilink"). The batik cloth is made stiff through a
process of molding, attaching to stiff paper, and sewing. Similar to
iket, blangkon and bendo come with some variations of shapes based on
the areas of origin and the wearer's social rank.

### Nepal

*[Bhakti Thapa](Bhakti_Thapa "wikilink"), a Gorkhali nobleman wearing
aristocratic white*Shirpau*turban.\]\] The turban in Nepal is commonly
worn in rural areas by males. The rural turban is called either a
[Pagdi](Pagri_(turban) "wikilink") or [Pheta](Pheta "wikilink"). It is
common among farmers. All types of coloured clothes were used for Pheta.
Historically, Gorkhali nobleman used to wear white turban called
**Shirpau** awarded by the [King of Nepal](King_of_Nepal "wikilink").
For example;*[Sardar](Sardar "wikilink")*[Ram Krishna
Kunwar](Ram_Krishna_Kunwar "wikilink") was awarded with 22 pairs of
headgear called **Shirpau** by the Gorkhali
monarch*[Maharajadhiraj](Maharajadhiraj "wikilink")'' [Prithvi Narayan
Shah](Prithvi_Narayan_Shah "wikilink"). It was common among aristocrats
in other contemporary kingdoms. Rulers and vassal lords also adapted a
crest to the white turban.

### Pakistan

, [Nawab](Nawab "wikilink") of Kot Fateh Khan in
[Pakistan](Pakistan "wikilink") wearing a turban made from of cloth\]\]
In [Pakistan](Pakistan "wikilink"), the turban is in widespread use,
especially among the rural population. It is worn in different styles
and colours across the country, varying by region, e.g. in the north of
the country, black and white turbans are preferred. The turban most
commonly found in Pakistan is white and crestless, and worn commonly in
the Pashtun belt, while in rural Punjab and Sindh, it is mostly worn by
elders or in rural areas. The turban is called either a *pagri* or *pag*
by Punjabis, while it's called *patke* by Pashtuns.

The [Baloch](Baloch_people "wikilink") people are famous for their large
turbans that are worn with both ends hanging from the sides or as a loop
that rests above the chest. These turbans are made with many feet of
cloth that are wrapped around a cap and are mostly made with white
cloth.

### United Kingdom

`wearing a turban and matching robe]]`

In the [United Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink"), turbans have been
worn by men and women since the sixth century without ever becoming very
common. Poet [Alexander Pope](Alexander_Pope "wikilink") is sometimes
depicted wearing a turban, as were other notable men seen in
contemporary paintings and illustrations. The common use of turbans on
less formal occasions, among gentlemen at the time, reflects that their
heads were closely cropped, or shaved, to allow the wearing of the
elaborate wigs that were the fashion in Europe in the century from about
1650 to 1750, and when wigs were off, some kind of head cover was
useful. Hence, the turban.

Now that hats are infrequently worn, turbans too are relatively
uncommon. They are worn primarily by women of West Indian descent,
Karinas. Some women wear them to make a statement of individuality, such
as the British [social entrepreneur](social_entrepreneur "wikilink")
[Camila Batmanghelidjh](Camila_Batmanghelidjh "wikilink"), who usually
wears a colourful matching turban and robe.

### Greece

In [Greece](Greece "wikilink"), specifically the island of
[Crete](Crete "wikilink"), the men traditionally wear a turban known as
a *sariki*. The headwrap's name is borrowed from *sarık*, the
[Turkish](Turkish_language "wikilink") word for turban. Today, it may be
more commonly known as a *kritiko mandili* (Cretan kerchief). It is not
found commonly amongst the younger generation, but mostly worn by older
men in remoter, mountainous villages.

### Fiji

[iTaukei](Fijians "wikilink") indigenous chiefs and priests were known
to have worn [*masi*](Masi_(Fiji) "wikilink") (barkcloth) coverings
around their head similar to a turban, called an *i-sala*. However, most
of the bulk and shape of the *i-sala* came from the bushy hair under the
cloth.

### Babuyan Islands

On some Babuyan islands (Philippines) the head of the household wears a
white turban, the younger males wear a red turban after their 13th
birthday. The three chiefs all wear yellow turbans. It no longer has
religious significance and the origin dates back to the end of the Tondo
era (cira 900s – 1589) Most Babuyan settlers fled the Philippines in
1589 when Spain began to invade the Philippines. The turban was made
from a type of bark cloth but now is made from cotton or silk brought
over from the Philippines mainland. The turban style head dress is then
cut and wrapped around the head, then tucked in front.

### Armenia

Much of Armenia's traditions and cultures reflect [Middle
Eastern](Middle_Eastern "wikilink") origins. Though not common in daily
apparel, turbans are sometimes worn by men ceremonially (often with
beards), as a symbol of national identity during celebrations and
festivals. However, before Armenia became a Christian nation, turbans
were a common part of the daily apparel, just as in other Middle Eastern
countries.

### Other

On the [Swahili Coast](Swahili_Coast "wikilink"), turbans were
frequently worn by the ruling [Omani](Oman "wikilink") [Sultans of
Zanzibar](List_of_Sultans_of_Zanzibar "wikilink") and their retinue.

[Tuareg Berbers](Tuareg_people "wikilink"), and some northern
[Berbers](Berber_people "wikilink"),
[Sahrawi](Sahrawi_people "wikilink"),
[Songhai](Songhai_people "wikilink"), [Wodaabe](Wodaabe "wikilink"),
[Fulani](Fula_people "wikilink"), and [Hausa](Hausa_people "wikilink")
peoples of [North](North_Africa "wikilink") and [West
Africa](West_Africa "wikilink") wear varieties of turbans. Tuareg
Berbers often veil the face to block dust. This Tuareg-Berber turban is
known as a [tagelmust](tagelmust "wikilink"), and is often blue. The
Bedouin tribes in [North Africa](North_Africa "wikilink") sometimes wear
brown-beige, white or orange turbans. [Colombian](Colombia "wikilink")
politician [Piedad Cordoba](Piedad_Cordoba "wikilink") is known to wear
turbans (or a similar headgear). Her use of turbans has made her so
distinguishable to the point of having earned the nickname "the lady
with the turban" in Colombian popular culture.

[Kurdish people](Kurdish_people "wikilink") wear a turban, which they
call a *jamadani*. It is worn in many different ways across [Iraqi
Kurdistan](Iraqi_Kurdistan "wikilink") depending on the style of the
locality; e.g. the [Barzani Kurds](Barzani_Kurds "wikilink") are a tribe
which wears the turban in a colour (red and white) and style which is
typical of their clan. In most parts of [South
Kurdistan](Iraqi_Kurdistan "wikilink") a black-white pattern is used for
Jamadani. Mostly, Kurdish turbans consist of a length of striped cloth
known as *kolāḡī* which is wound around a conical hat; the tassels that
border the kolāḡī are allowed to hang down over the face. In modern
times, many Kurds use black and white [Ghutra](Ghutra "wikilink") and
roll them into turbans.

## In religion

### Christianity

'') on the [Swahili Coast](Swahili_Coast "wikilink") wearing a
turban.\]\] In [Kenya](Kenya "wikilink"), the Akurinu, a Christian
denomination, wear turbans as religious headgear. The official name of
the denomination is The Kenya Foundation Of The Prophets Church or else
Holy Ghost Church. Both men and women wear white turbans; children wear
tunics.

### Islam

In [Islamic](Islamic "wikilink") cultures, some men wear a turban-style
headdress in emulation of [Muhammad](Muhammad "wikilink") who is
believed to have worn a black or white turban. In Islam, the turban is a
*Sunnah Mu'akkadah* (Confirmed Tradition). The head wraps are worn in
different ways and called by different names depending on the region and
culture. Examples include ( *\`emãmah*) in Arabic, ( ) in Persian.

In [Shi'a Islam](Shi'a_Islam "wikilink"), a black head wrap around a
small white cap is worn by descendants of Muhammad called
[Sayyids](Sayyid "wikilink"), and white turbans by other well-educated
persons and scholars. Sufi Muslims often wear a green head wrap around a
small cap or the green head wrap alone.

In [Sudan](Sudan "wikilink"), large white headdresses connote high
social status. In Pakistan the cap is called a
[topi](Taqiyah_(cap) "wikilink"). Women of Islam do not wear turbans, as
it is considered part of a man's dress, while women do cover their hair
as part of [hijab](hijab "wikilink").

<File:Statue> of Averroes (Córdoba) - BAE09705.jpg\|[Ibn Rushd
(Averroes)](Averroes "wikilink") [Muslim](Muslim "wikilink")
[polymath](polymath "wikilink") from [Spain](Spain "wikilink").
<File:Ralamb-40.jpg%7CIn> the [Ottoman
Empire](Ottoman_Empire "wikilink"), [Muhammad](Muhammad "wikilink")'s
numerous descendants formed a kind of nobility with the privilege of
wearing green turbans. <File:Muslim> sheikh, Tbilisi (de Baye).JPG\|A
Georgian Muslim imam from Tbilisi wearing a turban. <File:Habib> umar
with imam zaid shakir.jpg\|thumb\|[Habib Umar bin
Hafiz](Habib_Umar_bin_Hafiz "wikilink") (left) of
[Yemen](Yemen "wikilink") wearing a white turban.

### Judaism

When the Jewish High Priest served in the Tabernacle and the Temple in
Jerusalem, he wore a head covering called *mitznefet* מִצְנֶפֶת. This
word has been translated as *mitre* (KJV) or *headdress*. It was most
likely a turban, as the word comes from a root meaning 'to wrap'.

In the [Hebrew Bible](Hebrew_Bible "wikilink"), the turban worn by the
High Priest was much larger than the head coverings of the priests and
wound to make a broad, flat-topped shape resembling the blossom of a
flower. The head covering of the priests was different, being wound to
form a cone, called a *migbahat*.

The priestly crown (Hebrew *tzitz* צִיץ "blossom", "flower") was
attached to the turban by means of two sets of blue cords: one going
over the top of the head and the other around the sides of the head at
the level of the ears (Exodus 39:31).

According to the [Talmud](Talmud "wikilink"), the wearing of the turban
atoned for the sin of haughtiness on the part of the Children of Israel
(B. Zevachim 88b).

The Jews who lived under Arab rule during the Middle Ages, notably in
Islamic Spain, wore turbans and headwear not too different from their
Muslim counterparts.

### Rastafari

Members of the [Bobo Shanti mansion](Mansions_of_Rastafari "wikilink")
of the [Rastafari movement](Rastafari_movement "wikilink") keep their
hair and beards, mainly with their hair in
[dreadlocks](dreadlocks "wikilink"), and they have been wearing turbans
over their dreadlocks, which are not to be removed publicly or even not
at all, so as to protect and keep their dreadlocks clean. Along with the
turban, they have also been wearing robes since their founding in the
1950s, Since they are a relatively small population, it makes them more
distinctive in appearance in [Jamaica](Jamaica "wikilink") and
elsewhere.

### Sikhism

The [Sikh](Sikh "wikilink") turban, known as the
*[Dastar](Dastar "wikilink")* or a *[Dumalla](Dumalla "wikilink")* or a
"Pagg" (cultural name), is used to show others that they represent the
embodiment of Sikh teachings, the love of the Guru and dogma to do good
deeds. The main reason Sikhs wear the turban is that it is a way for
anyone in society, regardless of religion, race, caste etc to easily
identify a Sikh, man or woman, so that if an individual were in danger
or needing help, they could easily spot a fellow Sikh in a crowd, whose
duty it would be to help save and protect them. The Gurus ensured that
both men and women are able to wear a turban, which shows another action
of equality. Other Purposes of the turban include protecting Sikhs' long
unshorn hair and keeping it clean. The wearing of the turban is
mandatory for all members of [Khalsa](Khalsa "wikilink") (Initiated
Sikhs). The [Rajastani](Rajastan "wikilink") turban is also commonly
called the *pagari* (in the West, many Sikhs who wear pagri are
sometimes mistaken for Muslims or Arabs. ).

`turban cotton over a wicker frame, steel overlaid with gold. Lahore Mid-19th century, "A tall conical turban provided convenient transportation for a number of sharp steel `[`quoits`](Chakram "wikilink")` – edged weapons hurled to lethal effect by the practised hand of the Akalis."]]`

All [Sikh Gurus](Sikh_Gurus "wikilink") since [Guru
Nanak](Guru_Nanak "wikilink") have worn turbans. Some reasons Sikhs wear
the turban are to take care of the hair, promote equality, and preserve
the Sikh identity. Sikh women may wear a turban if they wish.

Sikhs do not cut their hair, as a religious observance. The turban
protects the hair and keeps it clean. As Sikhs only form 2% of India's
population, their turbans help identify them. When he institutionalized
the turban as a part of the Sikh identity, Guru Gobind Singh said, "My
Sikh will be recognized among millions."

Turbans were formerly associated with the upper class, and many men in
the cultural elite still wear turbans. This distinction between the
turban-wearing upper class ([Sardars](Sardar "wikilink")) and commoners
promoted segregation and elitism. In order to eliminate the class system
associated with turbans, Guru Gobind Singh Ji declared each and every
Sikh a Sardar. He also rejected the caste system by giving all Sikhs the
last names Singh (Lion) or Kaur (Princess).

Modern Sikh men mainly wear four kinds of Turban. Morni Turban, Patiala
Shahi Turban, Vattan Wali Turban and Amritsar Shahi Turban. The Dumalla
style is more traditional and can be recognized by its horizontal wraps,
versus the peaked wraps as seen in the aforementioned styles. The
Dumalla is becoming more popular among Sikh youth (men and women).

The [Dastar Bunga](Dastar_bunga "wikilink") is the style of turban
generally worn by [Akali](Nihang "wikilink") Singhs in battle. The
"Chand Tora" is a metal symbol consisting of a crescent and a double
edged sword, held in place at the front of the turban by a woven
chainmail cord tied in a pattern within the turban to protect the head
from slashing weapons. The purpose of the Tora is to keep the dastaar
together. It goes over the bunga (inner turban) to protect it. It is
also used for keeping [shastars](shastars "wikilink") (small weapons) in
place.

The most common turban colors worn by Sikhs are blue, white and black,
although other colors are very popular as well. Orange and yellow are
particularly prestigious and tend to be worn on religious events such as
[Vaisakhi](Vaisakhi "wikilink"). Meanings of the turbans are that the
white turban means a saintly person leading an exemplary life, and an
off-shade color of white means someone is learning in the Sikh religion.
The blue turban signifies a mind as broad as the sky with no place for
prejudice. The black turban is a reminder of the British persecution of
the Sikhs in 1919, and represents humility. The orange turban is
representative of courage, and wisdom. Royal blue is usually worn by
those who are learned in the Sikh religion. Akali Nihang Sikhs decorate
their turbans or [Dumalla](Dumalla "wikilink") by wearing small weapons
known as shastars in them. The turban's color may reflect association
with a particular group of Sikhs, although none of the popular turban
colors are exclusive to any particular group. Turban colors are
generally a matter of personal choice in Sikhism, with many Sikh men
choosing colors based on fashion or taste, sometimes to match clothes.
There are traditions associated with some colours, for instance orange
and black are often worn at political protest rallies whilst red and
pink turbans are worn at weddings and other celebratory events.

<File:Giani> Zail Singh 1995 stamp of India.jpg\|[Zail
Singh](Zail_Singh "wikilink"), the former [President of
India](President_of_India "wikilink"). <File:Manmohan> Singh
2012-06-18.jpg\|[Manmohan Singh](Manmohan_Singh "wikilink"), the former
[Prime Minister of India](Prime_Minister_of_India "wikilink").
<File:Gen> Bikram Singh.jpg\|[Bikram
Singh](Bikram_Singh_(general) "wikilink"), former [Chairman of the
Chiefs of Staff
Committee](Chairman_of_the_Chiefs_of_Staff_Committee "wikilink") of
India. <File:Fauja> Singh.jpg\|[Fauja Singh](Fauja_Singh "wikilink"), a
[centenarian](centenarian "wikilink") [marathon](marathon "wikilink")
runner. <File:Diljit> Dosanjh at Colors Golden Petal Awards.jpg\|[Diljit
Dosanjh](Diljit_Dosanjh "wikilink"), an actor, singer, television
presenter and social media celebrity. <File:Patiala> Shahi
Turban.JPG\|Young Sikh man wearing [Patiala Shahi
Pagg](Patiala_Shahi_Pagg "wikilink"). <File:Sikh> man, Agra 10.jpg \|A
Sikh wearing a turban, Agra, 2012 <File:Harjit> Sajjan February
2016.jpg\|200px\|[Harjit Singh Sajjan](Harjit_Singh_Sajjan "wikilink"),
the [Minister of National Defence of
Canada](Minister_of_National_Defence_(Canada) "wikilink") wearing a
[Sikh turban](Dastar "wikilink"). The turban is one of the most
recognized symbols of the Sikh community.

## See also

-   [Turban training centre](Turban_training_centre "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Why Sikhs wear a
    turban](http://www.sikhcoalition.org/sikh-theology-why-sikhs-wear-a-turban)
-   [Sikh Fortress
    Turban](https://web.archive.org/web/20151019000636/http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_objects/asia/s/sikh_fortress_turban.aspx)
-   [Tutorial on how to make a Turban
    (Pagri)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8kphlX9gcX0)
-   [Information on why Sikhs wear
    Turbans](http://www.sikhnet.com/s/WhyTurbans)
-   [Understanding
    Turbans](https://web.archive.org/web/20050619082341/http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/news/lifestyles/links/turbans_27.html)
-   [Largest Turbon of Shivaji Maharaj World Records
    India](http://www.worldrecordsindia.com/2018/02/largest-shivaji-maharaj-paghdi-jiretop/)