`wearing traditional hat styles as part of their village costume, L to R: `[`Bolzano`](Bolzano "wikilink")` (Bozen), S Tyrol; `[`Lienz`](Lienz "wikilink")`, E Tyrol; `[`Abfaltersbach`](Abfaltersbach_(Tirol) "wikilink")`, E Tyrol; `[`Kaltern`](Kaltern "wikilink")`, S Tyrol; `[`Jenesien`](Jenesien "wikilink")`, S Tyrol. (commanders)]]`

The **Tyrolean hat** ( , ), also **Bavarian hat** or **Alpine hat**, is
a type of [headwear](hat "wikilink") that originally came from the
[Tyrol](Tyrol_(region) "wikilink") in the [Alps](Alps "wikilink"), in
what is now part of [Austria](Austria "wikilink"),
[Germany](Germany "wikilink"), [Italy](Italy "wikilink") and
[Switzerland](Switzerland "wikilink").

A typical Tyrolean hat originally had a crown tapering to a point and
was made of green [felt](felt "wikilink") with a
[brim](brim_(hat) "wikilink") roughly the width of a hand, something
that was especially common in the [Zillertal](Zillertal "wikilink").

There are various forms of Tyrolean hat. Frequently the hats are
decorated with a coloured, corded [hatband](hatband "wikilink") and a
spray of flowers, [feathers](feather "wikilink") or "brush" at the side
of the crown. The traditional "brush" is made of the beard of the
chamois goat. It takes a variety of forms, and may often be combined
with feathers.

The Tyrolean hat became even better known thanks to [Edward
VIII](Edward_VIII "wikilink") who, after his abdication, frequently
stayed in Austrian [Styria](Styria "wikilink") and often wore a hat of
Tyrolean style, although it did not come from there.

In the 19th and 20th centuries, Tyrolean [costumes](Tracht "wikilink")
developed a certain degree of uniformity in their appearance. In the
local village costumes of the Tyrol, the various styles of Tyrolean hat
have survived since the 1830s/1840s, albeit similar to those of
contemporary fashion. These original forms vary from the tall,
relatively narrow-brimmed hats of North Tyrol which were dented on top,
to the small, wide-brimmed hats of the South Tyrolean wine country.

Later the Tyrolean hat became the image bearer of "Tyrolean culture" as
a tourist symbol, influenced also by folk music bands who wore fanciful
"local" costumes. The musician, Billy Mo, wrote a song in 1962 called "I
Prefer to Buy a Tyrolean Hat", which reinforced the link between the hat
and traditional Alpine (brass band) folk music. In 1965, a comedy
musical appeared under the same title.

It is said that the Tyrolean hat was the inspiration for the
[homburg](homburg_(hat) "wikilink").

## Gallery

<File:Petzenburg> Knabe mit Tirolerhut und Äffchen.jpg\|*Boy with
Tyrolean hat and monkey* (*Knabe mit Tirolerhut und Äffchen*). Oil on
canvas, c. 1834 <File:Andreas> hofer mit hut.jpg\|[Andreas
Hofer](Andreas_Hofer "wikilink"), wearing the typical, broad-brimmed
flat hat of the South Tyrolean type (posthumous portrait, mid-19th
century)
<File:Lovis_Corinth_-_Selbstportraet_mit_Tiroler_Hut_1913.jpg>\|*Self
portrait with Tyrolean hat* (*Selbstporträt mit Tiroler Hut*), [Lovis
Corinth](Lovis_Corinth "wikilink") <File:Tyrolean> hat.jpg\|Simple,
party version of the Tyrolean hat <File:Tyrolean> hat 3.jpg\|Tyrolean
hat with [Volksmarching](Volksmarching "wikilink") pins

## See also

-   [Seppel](Seppel "wikilink"), the figure with a *Seppelhut* hat, the
    Bavarian-North Tyrolean felt cap with or without a brim

## References