![](3rd_Duke_of_Fife_in_Kilt._Allan_Warren.jpg "fig:3rd_Duke_of_Fife_in_Kilt._Allan_Warren.jpg")
in a plain cuff Crail jacket.
(photograph by Allan Warren, 1984)\]\]

The Argyll [Highland jacket](Highland_dress "wikilink") is a shorter
than regular jacket with gauntlet cuffs and pocket flaps and front
cutaway for wearing with a [sporran](sporran "wikilink") and
[kilt](kilt "wikilink"). It can be of tweed, tartan or solid colour
material. The Argyll is the standard day wear jacket.[1][2]

Other jackets of the same cutaway for the sporran and kilt are known by
other names, such as Crail and Braemar but they are generally often just
referred to as an Argyll jacket.

## Gallery

<File:Fitzroy> Donald Maclean.jpg\|[Fitzroy Donald
Maclean](Fitzroy_Donald_Maclean "wikilink") in tartan Argyll jacket.
<File:Kilted.jpg%7CBlack> [Barathea](Barathea "wikilink") Silver Button
Argyll (BBSBA) jacket, worn with a five button vest and long tie for day
wear. Suitable for evening wear with a three button vest and bow tie.
<File:Gavin> Campbell, Vanity Fair, 1894-09-13.jpg\|[Gavin
Campbell](Gavin_Campbell,_1st_Marquess_of_Breadalbane "wikilink")
wearing a Crail jacket. "The Queen's Lord Steward". Caricature by
[Spy](Leslie_Ward "wikilink") published in [Vanity
Fair](Vanity_Fair_(British_magazine_1868-1914) "wikilink") in 1894.
<File:Malcolm> Macdonald - Chief Constable of Sutherland Constabulary
from 1887 to 1906 (7275757622).jpg\|Malcolm Macdonald wearing Argyll
jacket

## References

[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:Scottish
clothing](Category:Scottish_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]