---
title: Baja jacket
permalink: /Baja_jacket/
---

[thumb\|right\|190px\|An American man wearing a Baja
jacket](/File:DavidAldrich.jpg "wikilink") A **Baja jacket** (also known
as a "Mexican threads hoodie", **Baja hoodie**, **Baja sweatshirt** or
**drug rug**) is a type of Mexican jacket with a single large pocket on
the front, and [vents](/Vent_(tailoring) "wikilink") on the side. They
are often decorated with patterns consisting of horizontal stripes on
the sleeves and hood, and vertical stripes down the rest of the jacket.
The [drawstrings](/drawstring "wikilink") are often flatter and more
rectangular than most jacket drawstrings, and always made of the same
material as the rest of the jacket. The jackets are often associated
with the [cannabis](/Drug_culture#Cannabis_culture "wikilink") and [surf
cultures](/surf_culture "wikilink").

They are very popular in the [hippie](/hippie "wikilink") subculture[1]
and among fans of post-hair metal.

They are known primarily as a "baja hoodie" or "drug rug" because of the
subculture in which they are popular.

In the 1970s, [Californian](/California "wikilink") surfers brought
these hooded shirts back from surf trips to [Baja
California](/Baja_California "wikilink") in
[Mexico](/Mexico "wikilink"). They became associated with surfers and
surfing in Mexican coastal towns and were worn as beachwear in cool
weather.[2] The shirts, called "sudadera de jerga" (“slang sweatshirt”)
in Mexico, are also traditionally worn by
[Mexican-American](/Mexican-Americans "wikilink") and
[Mexican](/Mexican_people "wikilink") youth, especially young men, and
can be considered a part of *[cholo](/cholo "wikilink")* style.[3]

Baja jackets are made with a variety of different materials, often
[cotton](/cotton "wikilink"), [acrylic](/Acrylic_fiber "wikilink") and
[polyester](/polyester "wikilink"). The fabric can be made from
[recycled](/recycled "wikilink") fibers, such as recycled
[T-shirts](/T-shirts "wikilink").[4] The jackets tend to be somewhat
waterproof and fast-drying, making them more suitable for the elements.
Some jackets have a soft lining for extra comfort and warmth.

In recent years, they have been adapted to simply become
[hoodies](/hoodies "wikilink") with some alterations like a zipper
running up the middle. Because the striped pattern resembles a Mexican
*[serape](/serape "wikilink")*, the Baja jacket is sometimes referred to
as a [poncho](/poncho "wikilink"), but the two should not be confused. A
poncho is a single piece of fabric with a head opening and sometimes arm
openings. However, a poncho does not have
[sleeves](/sleeves "wikilink"), whereas the Baja jacket does.

## References

[Category:Mexican clothing](/Category:Mexican_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Tourism in Baja
California](/Category:Tourism_in_Baja_California "wikilink")
[Category:Surf culture](/Category:Surf_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Hippie movement](/Category:Hippie_movement "wikilink")
[Category:Tops (clothing)](/Category:Tops_(clothing) "wikilink")

[1]

[2]
-

[3]
-
-
-

[4]