The **bed jacket** is a lightweight [jacket](jacket "wikilink") worn to
cover the chest, shoulders and arms while sitting up in bed. Its short
length and [cape](cape "wikilink")-like cut allows for it to be put on
(or removed) while reclining. Originating in the 19th century as a
garment worn for warmth, bed jackets could be home-made[1] from
practical materials such as knitted [wool](wool "wikilink"),
[flannel](flannel "wikilink") or [cotton](cotton "wikilink"), or more
expensive garments designed to exchange a measure functionality for
elegance. They were popularized in 1930s Hollywood films, featuring
glamorous settings and female starlets lounging languorously in silken
bedrooms. Such bed jackets were often made from
[sheer](Sheer_fabric "wikilink") or [lacy](lace "wikilink") fabrics and
displaying very feminine [trimmings](Trim_(sewing) "wikilink") and
details, considered an alluring item rather than used for warmth or
modesty. Ostrich feather tips, swanâ€™s down, pleated
[tulle](Tulle_netting "wikilink") and shirred lace were just a few
examples of the extravagant materials that could be used in creating
these confections.

## References

[Category:Nightwear](Category:Nightwear "wikilink")
[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:Robes and
cloaks](Category:Robes_and_cloaks "wikilink")

[1] *The Dictionary Of Fashion History*, Valerie Cumming, C.W.
Cunnington, P.E. Cunnington, p18