![](Peter_Storm_vintage_cagoule_front.jpg "fig:Peter_Storm_vintage_cagoule_front.jpg")
cagoule with zipped side-slit hand access to undergarments and
extra-long sleeves with elasticated storm cuffs\]\] A **cagoule** (,
*[balaclava](Balaclava_(clothing) "wikilink")*), also spelled
**cagoul**, **kagoule** or **kagool**, is the [British
English](British_English "wikilink") term for a lightweight (usually
without lining), weatherproof [raincoat](raincoat "wikilink") or
[anorak](anorak "wikilink") with a hood, which often comes in
knee-length form.[1] The [Canadian English](Canadian_English "wikilink")
equivalent is [windbreaker](windbreaker "wikilink") or K-Way.

In some versions, when rolled up, the hood or cross-chest front pocket
doubles as a bag into which the shell can be packed.

## History and styles

A cagoule which could be rolled up into a very compact package and
carried in a bag or pocket was [patented](patent "wikilink")[2] by
former [Royal Marine](Royal_Marine "wikilink") Noel Bibby and launched
in the UK under the brand name [Peter
Storm](Peter_Storm_(clothing) "wikilink") in the early 1960s.[3]

In 1965, the French cagoule brand K-Way was introduced.[4]

Original versions were lightweight and packable with generally an
integral hood, elastic or drawstring cuffs, and a fastening at the neck.
Usually, the cagoule could not open fully at the front and was pulled on
over the head.

As a functional outdoor rain-garment, the original styling and
proportions allowed the wearer's small items of personal luggage to be
protected – [rucksack](rucksack "wikilink"), [waist
bag](fanny_pack "wikilink") and/or [camera bag](camera_bag "wikilink").

Later copied and marketed as a close-fitting cheap fashion accessory,
the style became very popular in the United Kingdom during the 1970s.

## Gallery

<File:Peter> Storm vintage cagoule rear full.jpg\|Peter Storm vintage
cagoule <File:Peter> Storm vintage cagoule rear with bags.jpg\|Styling
made weather protection to typical lightweight items of personal luggage
possible <File:K-Way.jpg%7CK-Way> cagoule

## See also

-   [Mackintosh](Mackintosh "wikilink")
-   [Parka](Parka "wikilink")

## References

[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:1960s
fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1970s
fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1980s
fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")

[1] The Chambers Dictionary, 1994,

[2]

[3] Invisible on Everest—innovation and the gear makers, Cassie Crute
and Mary Rose,

[4]