![](Gypsy_Joker_Protest_Run_5.jpg "fig:Gypsy_Joker_Protest_Run_5.jpg")
![](Kutte_Motorrad_vorn.jpg "fig:Kutte_Motorrad_vorn.jpg")A **cut-off**,
**battle jacket**, **battle vest** or **kutte** in [heavy
metal](heavy_metal_music "wikilink") subcultures, is a type of
[vest](vest "wikilink") or [jacket](jacket "wikilink") which originated
in the [biker](Outlaw_motorcycle_club "wikilink") subculture and later
found popularity in [punk](Punk_fashion "wikilink") and various [heavy
metal subcultures](heavy_metal_subculture "wikilink"). Biker, metal and
punk subcultures differ in how the garment is prepared, what decorations
are applied, and how this is done.

Cut-offs are usually made from leather or denim jackets with their
sleeves removed, or cut very short, and often adorned with patches,
badges and painted artwork that display motorcycle club affiliations
known as [colours](Colors_(motorcycling) "wikilink"),[1][2] or
alternatively band names, political affiliations, beliefs, or sexual
acts performed.[3]

In the 1970s and 1980s, cut-offs were almost always blue denim. [Thrash
metal](Thrash_metal "wikilink") fans favoured heavily washed denim,
while members of one British motorcycle club bleached theirs until they
were almost white. From the mid to late 1990s, some punks and
[metalheads](Heavy_metal_subculture "wikilink") have worn multi-pocketed
hunting or fishing vests, both in plain colours and
[camouflage](camouflage "wikilink") patterns, and leather
cut-offsâ€”always popular with punks, and with bikers in recent
decades.![](Anti-NowhereLeague-1-Augustibuller2007.jpg "fig:Anti-NowhereLeague-1-Augustibuller2007.jpg")

## Punk and hardcore

In [punk subculture](punk_subculture "wikilink"), cut-offs are often
leather (but can also be denim). Typical decorations are metal studs and
badges (often painted-on) of bands or political causes, with cloth
patches being secondary, ultimately because of the difficulty of doing
the required needlework on tough leather. In addition, sleeves are more
likely to be kept attached to the body of the jacket. As part of the
[DIY](DIY "wikilink") philosophy of the hardcore punk scene, the vests
may be home-repaired with heavy thread, dental floss, or safety pins,
and the band logos may be put on using paint and crude home-made
stencils. Some wearers also drape chains or other paraphernalia from the
vest. ![](Battlevests.jpg "fig:Battlevests.jpg")

## Heavy metal

Cut-offs in the heavy metal scene are often adorned with patches of
logos and album covers of bands, ranging in size from small square
patches to large patches that fill the back panel of the vest. Patches
are the main decoration. However, some Heavy Metal kutten have studs on
them, particularly for fans of [crossover
thrash](crossover_thrash "wikilink") bands such as mid-1980s
[Discharge](Discharge_(band) "wikilink") or of [thrash
metal](thrash_metal "wikilink").

## References

[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:1970s
fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1980s
fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Punk
fashion](Category:Punk_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Heavy metal
fashion](Category:Heavy_metal_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Motorcycling
subculture](Category:Motorcycling_subculture "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]