![](Donkey_Jacket.jpg "fig:Donkey_Jacket.jpg")
![](Sergent_Boston_Corbett,_16th_N.Y._Cav._Who_shot_J._Wilkes_Booth,_April_26,_1865._(2719965829).jpg "fig:Sergent_Boston_Corbett,_16th_N.Y._Cav._Who_shot_J._Wilkes_Booth,_April_26,_1865._(2719965829).jpg")
A **donkey jacket** is a medium-length [workwear](workwear "wikilink")
[jacket](jacket "wikilink"), typically made of unlined black or dark
blue thick [Melton](Melton_(cloth) "wikilink")
[woollen](wool "wikilink") fabric, with the shoulders back and front
reinforced and protected from rain with [leather](leather "wikilink") or
[PVC](PVC "wikilink") panels.

Originating in the United Kingdom, the garment is untailored at the
waist such that it hangs down straight from the shoulders. The front
vertical edges fall straight and are squared-off at the bottom edge
which is also straight horizontally with no vent at the back. In length
it reaches below the crotch area. It has no [lapels](lapel "wikilink")
and is closed by four to five buttons at the front that fasten tightly
up to the neck with a broad and stiff turn-up collar, allowing the
wearer to protect the neck from wind, cold and wet weather. It is thus
well suited to outdoors work in demanding conditions.

## Origins

In 1888 George Key opened up his own shop above his father John Key's
first-floor draper shop on Lower Brook Street in Rugeley Staffordshire,
England. That same year, Key designed a new type of coat made of a
hard-wearing material developed for those who were working on the
construction of the Manchester Ship Canal. Some of the
[navvies](navvies "wikilink") worked on [donkey
engines](steam_donkey "wikilink") (a steam-powered winch or logging
engine), providing the inspiration for the name of George Key's new
coat: the donkey jacket.[1]

## Design

The donkey jacket is derived from the wool **sack coat** worn by workers
in the 19th century, and the [Oxford English
Dictionary](Oxford_English_Dictionary "wikilink") references the term as
first used in 1929: "one with leather shoulders and back".[2] The jacket
usually has two capacious side pockets, and sometimes an inside
"poacher's pocket".

Later versions replaced the leather with a PVC panel covering the
shoulder-blade areas. This could be [fluorescent orange or
yellow](high-visibility_clothing "wikilink") and is sometimes branded
with the name of the company which supplied the jacket, or the name of
the company for which the wearer worked.

## Social significance

The donkey jacket is regarded as typical of the British manual labourer
and trade unionist as well as members of the political left. It is also
favoured by traditionalist [Teddy boys](Teddy_boy "wikilink"),
Rockabillys and [skinheads](skinhead "wikilink").[3][4] Former British
[Labour Party](Labour_Party_(UK) "wikilink") leader [Michael
Foot](Michael_Foot "wikilink") was criticised for wearing what was
described incorrectly[5] as a "donkey jacket" at a [Remembrance
Day](Remembrance_Day "wikilink") wreath laying ceremony and he was shown
wearing one on several covers of the satirical magazine *[Private
Eye](Private_Eye "wikilink")*.[6] It was a "very expensive short
overcoat" chosen by his wife, from [Harrods](Harrods "wikilink").[7][8]

## References

[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:British
fashion](Category:British_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2] "donkey". The Oxford English Dictionary. Second Edition, 1989. OED
Online. Oxford University Press. Retrieved November 9, 2009.

[3] TradSkin.Org, (1999), [alt.skinheads
FAQ](http://www.tradskin.org/faq.html) , . Retrieved 28 June 2007.

[4] Marshall, George (1991). Spirit of '69 - A Skinhead Bible. Dunoon,
Scotland: S.T. Publishing.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]