![](MA-1_Jacket_in_petrol.jpg "fig:MA-1_Jacket_in_petrol.jpg")\]\]

A **flight jacket** is a casual jacket that was originally created for
pilots and eventually became part of popular culture and apparel. It has
evolved into various styles and silhouettes, including the **"letterman"
jacket** and the fashionable **"bomber" jacket** that is known today.

## The flight jacket

### Early history

**World War I**
![](Richard_Byrd_in_flight_jacket,_1920s_(exbt-iceberg-47).jpg "fig:Richard_Byrd_in_flight_jacket,_1920s_(exbt-iceberg-47).jpg")
in flight jacket, 1920s\]\] In [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink"),
most airplanes did not have an enclosed [cockpit](cockpit "wikilink"),
so pilots had to wear something that would keep them sufficiently warm.
The [U.S. Army](United_States_Army "wikilink") officially established
the Aviation Clothing Board in September 1917 and began distributing
heavy-duty leather flight jackets; with high wraparound collars, zipper
closures with wind flaps, snug cuffs and waists, and some fringed and
[lined](lining_(sewing) "wikilink") with fur.

**World War II**
![](B-17_Bomber_Pilot_Flight_Jacket.jpeg "fig:B-17_Bomber_Pilot_Flight_Jacket.jpeg")
in WWII\]\] [Leslie Irvin](Leslie_Irvin_(parachutist) "wikilink") first
designed and manufactured the classic [sheepskin](sheepskin "wikilink")
flying jacket. In 1926 he set up a manufacturing company in the [United
Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink"), and became the main supplier of
flying jackets to the [Royal Air Force](Royal_Air_Force "wikilink")
during most of [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"). However, the
demand during the early years of the war was so great that the Irvin
company engaged subcontractors, which explains the slight variations of
design and colour that can be seen in early production Irvin flying
jackets.

As aerospace technology improved, the altitudes at which aircraft
operated increased. Most [heavy bombing
raids](Carpet_bombing "wikilink") in Europe during World War II took
place from altitudes of at least 25,000 ft, where ambient temperatures
could reach as cold as −50 °C (−58 °F). The cabins of these aircraft
were uninsulated, so a warm, thick flight jacket was an essential piece
of equipment for every member of the crew.

### Flight jackets in the United States

The two most historical American flight jackets are the [A-2
jacket](A-2_jacket "wikilink") and the
[G-1](G-1_military_flight_jacket "wikilink"). Although [General “Hap”
Arnold](Henry_H._Arnold "wikilink") cancelled the original A-2 after
twelve years because he wanted "something better", the A-2 remains the
most recognizable and sought-after American flight jacket. The G-1,
designed by the [U.S. Navy](United_States_Navy "wikilink") to parallel
the Air Corps’ A-2, lasted until 1978, when
[U.S. Congress](United_States_Congress "wikilink") cancelled it due to
its tremendous popular appeal, which was overwhelming the Navy's supply
system. Their popularity evolved into symbols of honor, adventure, and
style. [Hollywood](Cinema_of_the_United_States "wikilink") films like
*[Top Gun](Top_Gun "wikilink")* boosted sales of the G-1 tremendously,
making bomber jackets collector and fashion items.

In addition to the A-2 and G-1 jackets,
[shearling](shearling "wikilink") jackets, originally lined with fur,
are recognized for being the warmest flight jackets. Even when the fur
was replaced with [wool](wool "wikilink"), this coat was warm enough to
keep Lt. [John A. Macready](John_A._Macready "wikilink") warm when he
set a world record in April 1921, reaching an altitude of 40,000 feet in
his open-cockpit airplane. Styles range from the B-3 "bomber jacket", to
the [M-445](M-445 "wikilink"), the U.S. Navy's shearling jacket. Also
popular in the military were, and still are, synthetic jackets. These
jackets first gained esteem after General Hap Arnold rejected the A-2
jacket in 1942. Styles range from the cotton [twill](twill "wikilink")
B-series to the standardized jacket of the U.S. Navy, the CWU-series.
Both synthetic and shearling jackets are worn and collected by army
buffs today, but neither has the historical status of the
[A-2 jacket](A-2_jacket "wikilink") or the G-1.

Today, flight jackets are usually associated with the
[MA-1](MA-1_bomber_jacket "wikilink"), a now-obsolete
[U.S. military](United_States_Armed_Forces "wikilink") jacket, which is
mostly found in sage green. It is made with flight silk
[nylon](nylon "wikilink") and usually has a [blaze
orange](Safety_orange "wikilink") lining, with the specification tag in
the pocket, though earlier models had a sage-green lining and the
specification tag on the neck area. It has two slanted flap pockets on
the front, two inner pockets, and a zipped pocket with pen holders on
the left sleeve. The lighter weight version of the MA-1 is known as the
L-2B flight jacket, which in turn, replaced both the original L2 and L2A
jackets, which all three differentiate from the MA-1 as they have
snap-down [epaulets](Epaulette "wikilink") and no inside pockets. The
military flight jackets currently used today are the CWU-45P (for colder
weather) and the CWU-36P (for warmer weather); both are made from
[Nomex](Nomex "wikilink").

### Civilian uses

![](Bomber_baseball.jpg "fig:Bomber_baseball.jpg")Bomber Jackets were
first introduced to the [pilots](Aircraft_pilot "wikilink") during World
War-I to save their lives from the adverse climatic conditions. Later,
these jackets were also used by the various government agencies, defence
and military department too. [1] And now these jackets are in trend in
the fashion industry because of the casual & special look these jackets
give during their bike riding and parties. In the 1970s flight jackets
became popular with [scooterboys](scooterboy "wikilink") and
[skinheads](skinhead "wikilink"). In the 1980s, a variant jacket made of
wool became popular (see letterman jacket below). In the early 2000s,
the bomber jacket was popular casual wear in
[hip-hop](Hip_hop "wikilink") fashion. The jacket has also caught on
with several police departments across the United States for its sturdy
design and heavy insulation. Flight jacket has had a resurgence in
popularity during the 2010s in street fashion, and is a notable staple
of celebrities such as [Kanye West](Kanye_West "wikilink").

## The letterman jacket

### Background and history

The varsity letters were first customized by
[Harvard](Harvard_University "wikilink") University in 1865 and
originally designed to reward baseball players on their teams as a token
for exceptional performance. The term
"[letterman](Letterman_(sports) "wikilink")" comes from the letter,
which is the initial or signature icon, that is placed on the front or
back of these sweaters and jackets. These "letterman" (also known as
"[varsity](University "wikilink")") sweaters or jackets were worn to
represent the social identities of athletes and reflect a strong sense
of team spirit, pride of belonging to a particular school, and values of
collectivism.[2] The letters on the jackets represented the school and
were therefore placed with the intention of acknowledging scholastic
achievement of the wearer.

As the trend of letterman jackets spread among colleges and teenagers
after WWII, the concept was expanded to award the performance of
students in aspects other than sports. With the increasing number of
university students due to the popularization of high school education
in the US, these jackets are no longer specialized for athletic players
but represent a student's identity through their school/college's
initials. Similar to the flight jacket, letterman jackets have a
loose-fitted silhouette that is genderless in style, although they may
include a banded collar for men or a top-buttoned hood that unbuttons
into an expanded collar for women.

### Materials and techniques

The body of the jacket is usually made of [boiled
wool](boiled_wool "wikilink") which provides warmth and the sleeves are
generally made of [leather](leather "wikilink") with banded wrists and
waistbands. The letter of the belonging school is mostly constructed in
[chenille](Chenille_fabric "wikilink") and [felt](felt "wikilink")
materials and made in the school's signature color. The "[moss
stitch](moss_stitch "wikilink")" creates the chenille look of the letter
with a [chain stitch](chain_stitch "wikilink") to provide an outline to
the letter.[3]

### Colors

Since the letterman jackets represent the student's identity according
to which school they come from, they are usually designed according to
the school's signature color. Mostly, the school's primary signature
color is applied on the body of the jacket while the sleeves are the
school's secondary signature color. For example, the
[Harvard](Harvard_University "wikilink") letterman jackets are usually
crimson on the body color and white on the sleeves.

### Influences

Besides serving as an identity of university/college students, the
letterman jacket was modified and became a popular casual wear in the
[hip-hop](Hip_hop "wikilink") fashion segment during the early 2000s and
started to evolve into the bomber jacket. Led by [Kanye
West](Kanye_West "wikilink"), bomber jackets became an iconic [hip-hop
fashion](Hip_hop_fashion "wikilink") item instead of being associated
with the military or colleges. Teenagers often enjoy customizing their
own bomber jackets with their favorite colors and own initials to
represent themselves. With the global trend of hip hop in recent years,
bomber jackets have become an essential fashion item that includes
varied design elements.

## The bomber jacket

### Background and history

The bomber jacket originates from military clothing which trickled down
into [subcultures](subculture "wikilink") such as punk and has recently
made its way into high fashion. The military bomber jacket was made to
be versatile for functionality as it was a lightweight jacket that kept
soldiers warm. The B-15 jacket consisted of a fur collar made of cotton
which was later changed to nylon after 1945 since it was considered more
suitable because it is water resistant and kept perspiration out (Cruz,
2016). Bombers appeared in Europe during the late 1950s and in 1963, the
jackets were popularized by European Air Forces and eventually the
commercial consumer. Subcultures picked up on the stylish jacket and
established it as part of their uniform such as the British
[skinheads](skinhead "wikilink") in the late 1960s.

Japan was also greatly influenced by the American fashion sense after
the Second World War. Notably in 1951, Kensuke Ishizu established his
brand VAN that gave Japanese youth culture stylish clothing not found
locally such as oxford shirts and slim trousers. The bomber jacket still
remains popular during the twentieth century as a part of the grunge and
street-wear subculture, whilst the “Kanye effect” further influenced its
popularity.

### Silhouette

The silhouette of the bomber jacket has not altered a lot compared to
the original, although it has an athletic and masculine silhouette with
a fitted waist and more generous fit, like the bulky sleeves and extra
pockets so as to be functional. The bomber jacket trend inspired a vast
majority of fashion designers to reinterpret and revisit the silhouette
of menswear today. For instance, the S/S 2000 collections from [Raf
Simons](Raf_Simons "wikilink") which changed the original design into a
more symmetrical form, the elongated bombers from [Rick
Owens](Rick_Owens "wikilink"), floral printed versions from
[Balenciaga](Balenciaga "wikilink"), [Dries Van
Noten](Dries_van_Noten "wikilink") and many more.

The bomber jacket is a neutral fashion item with no limitations when it
comes to genders, ages or styles. Shapes of the bomber jackets are
modified into dress-like jackets or even one-piece dresses.

### Materials

Due to high altitudes and breakneck speeds in less advanced airplanes
compared to modern day, [Royal Flying
Corps](Royal_Flying_Corps "wikilink") in [Belgium](Belgium "wikilink")
and [France](France "wikilink") started to wear heavy leather flying
jackets in the 1910s as leather was considered as the heaviest and
strongest material for jackets.[4] Since then, original bomber jackets
were made in heavy-duty leather in order to provide warmth for military
pilots.

The A2 which was released by the [US Army Air
Corps](United_States_Army_Air_Corps "wikilink") was made with high
wraparound collars, cinched cuffs and waists, and zipper closures
protected by wind flaps and fur linings and had a high durability.[5]
Since then there have been various versions of the bomber jacket, from
having fur collars, cotton outers and leather straps to knit collars and
orange lining in the bomber jacket to aid in visibility in case an
incident were to occur.

Materials of the bomber jacket are continuously changed each season to
bring unconventional styles that cater to customer's needs. Not only do
designers use leather and wool, but fabrics such as silk, neoprene,
satin and gauze are used. Decorative elements like
[ruffles](ruffle "wikilink"), [embroidered](Embroidery "wikilink")
patchwork, lace-ups are also added on the bomber jackets, making them an
essential fashion item that comes in a variety of colors, fabrications,
and styles.

### Colors

Bomber jackets originally appeared in a midnight blue hue, which was
later switched to a sage green after the [Korean](Korean_War "wikilink")
and [Vietnamese wars](Vietnam_War "wikilink") since it was easier for
soldiers to camouflage themselves amongst the forests or countryside
during the 1960s. Bomber jackets became popular in the non-military
audience in the late 1960s to 1980s, especially when the English punks
and skinheads started taking over the trend and changed the color into
burgundy in order to distinguish themselves and their bomber jackets
from the original military flight jackets. Brown is also a classic color
for leather flight jackets.[6]

Due to the popularity of the jacket, both high street and high end
brands have designed the bomber jacket in a variety of hues. Other than
the standard navy blue, army green and black, the bomber can be found in
pastel tones such as baby pink, blue, mint, or even gold and silver.

## See also

-   [A-2 jacket](A-2_jacket "wikilink")
-   [Blouson](Blouson "wikilink")
-   [Eisenhower jacket](Eisenhower_jacket "wikilink")
-   [G-suit](G-suit "wikilink")
-   [Leather jacket](Leather_jacket "wikilink")
-   [MA-1 bomber jacket](MA-1_bomber_jacket "wikilink")
-   [MA-2 bomber jacket](MA-2_bomber_jacket "wikilink")
-   [Sukajan](Sukajan "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Manufacturer A-2 Leather Flight
    Jacket](http://www.a-2leatherflightjacket.com)

[Category:1910s fashion](Category:1910s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:Military
aviation](Category:Military_aviation "wikilink") [Category:Military
uniforms](Category:Military_uniforms "wikilink") [Category:Aircrew
clothing](Category:Aircrew_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]