![](James_Dean_in_Rebel_Without_a_Cause.jpg "fig:James_Dean_in_Rebel_Without_a_Cause.jpg")
from the film *[Rebel Without a
Cause](Rebel_Without_a_Cause "wikilink")* wearing a Harrington
jacket.\]\]

A **Harrington jacket** (originally known only as a **Baracuta jacket**
or a **G9**) is a lightweight, waist-length jacket made of
[cotton](cotton "wikilink"), [polyester](polyester "wikilink"),
[wool](wool "wikilink") or [suede](suede "wikilink"). Designs often
incorporate traditional [Fraser
tartan](Clan_Fraser_of_Lovat#Fraser_tartans "wikilink") or
checkerboard-patterned [lining](lining_(sewing) "wikilink").[1]

## History

![](Carl_Crim_Headshot.jpg "fig:Carl_Crim_Headshot.jpg") for
[truckers](trucker "wikilink"). Note the external pockets similar to an
[ike jacket](ike_jacket "wikilink").\]\] The first Harrington-style
jackets were claimed to be made in the 1930s by the British clothing
company, **[Baracuta](Baracuta "wikilink")**. [2][3] Baracuta's original
design, the G9, is still in production.[4] The British company
**Grenfell** also claims to have invented an identical jacket around the
same time based on their golf jackets which is also still in production
using their own signature cotton. The Harrington from either original
source is based on lightweight, roomy jackets worn to play
[Golf](Golf "wikilink") hence the G in the G4 or G9 naming convention
for Baracuta. Both versions were originally made in
[Lancashire](Lancashire "wikilink"), England. Baracuta originally
manufactured their jacket in [Manchester](Manchester "wikilink") whereas
Grenfell were based in [Burnley](Burnley "wikilink") then London.

[Elvis Presley](Elvis_Presley "wikilink") popularized the Baracuta G9 in
his 1958 movie *[King Creole](King_Creole "wikilink").* The jacket got
the nickname "Harrington" from a character in the 1960s [prime
time](prime_time "wikilink") [soap opera](soap_opera "wikilink"),
*[Peyton Place](Peyton_Place_(TV_series) "wikilink")*.[5] The character
in question, [Rodney Harrington](Rodney_Harrington "wikilink") (played
by [Ryan O'Neal](Ryan_O'Neal "wikilink")), is often depicted in a
Harrington jacket. It is often claimed that British menswear retailer
John Simons christened the jacket originally on a tag casually when for
sale in his shop with its name based temporarily on the TV character.

[Steve McQueen](Steve_McQueen "wikilink"), [James
Dean](James_Dean "wikilink") and [Frank
Sinatra](Frank_Sinatra "wikilink") were photographed wearing
Harrington-style jackets in films and their personal lives. In the US,
the McGregor produced Drizzler jacket was an alternative jacket in the
same design. The lower cost version by [Van
Heusen](Van_Heusen_(brand) "wikilink") was also highly popular in the
mid 20th century era within USA though is no longer produced. This is
also true of a version by [London Fog](London_Fog_(company) "wikilink").

The jacket was seen on visiting USA servicemen after World War II and
was adopted as a light, modern jacket by the emerging style conscious
youth during the 1950s. As the Mod scene became more casual and widely
adopted, the jacket became popular amongst those identifying as part of
that style subculture. When guitarist [Eric
Clapton](Eric_Clapton "wikilink") felt that [The
Yardbirds](The_Yardbirds "wikilink") Rhythm & Blues
[Mod](Mod_(subculture) "wikilink") band he played in was becoming long
haired and foppish, he cut his hair short, wore a classic harrington and
rolled-up jeans inspired by the USA casual college look he had seen on
USA servicemen when visiting his mother in Germany. This look was seen
on TV in July 1964 and is referenced widely as a key subcultural style
moment prior to his leaving the band. The jacket became part of Mod wear
as that scene became increasingly casualised and stripped down in its
mid-1960s later adoptees wearing more polo tops and t-shirts with the
jacket. This look became known informally as the 'Peanut' and was part
of the progression towards the early [skinhead](skinhead "wikilink")
look. This trend carried the adoption of the jacket on through the Mods
and Skinheads, including their short-lived Suedehead later smart
incarnation.

The jacket became fashionable in the [United
Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink") in the 1960s among
[mods](Mod_(subculture) "wikilink") and
[skinheads](skinhead "wikilink").[6] These subcultures adopted it as a
USA jacket broadly seen in popular media and were largely unaware of its
British origins. They enjoyed a resurgence in the late 1970s and early
1980s with [skinhead](skinhead "wikilink") and [mod
revivalists](mod_revival "wikilink"), as well as old and new fans of
[Northern soul](Northern_soul "wikilink") and
[scooterboys](scooterboy "wikilink") which had both evolved in part
onwards from the original Mod scene as specialist areas of focus that
became their own subculture. Within those
[subcultures](subculture "wikilink"), Harringtons are often, though in
no way exclusively, worn with [Fred Perry](Fred_Perry "wikilink") or
[Ben Sherman](Ben_Sherman "wikilink") shirts.[7] By the mid-1970s it may
be seen more with bowling and polo shirts than its original wear.

It's adoption carried onwards by [Punks](Punk_subculture "wikilink") in
the late 1970s, fans of Indie rock in the 1980s and 1990s. A further
revival of the jacket was associated with the mid-1990s rise of [Brit
Pop](Britpop "wikilink") with it worn by [Damon
Albarn](Damon_Albarn "wikilink") of [Blur](Blur_(band) "wikilink"),
[Oasis](Oasis_(band) "wikilink") and other bands. Britpop style combined
Mod fashion with casual sport streetwear. Following the Britpop revival
the jacket featured prominently in a light blue version worn by the lead
character Gavin played by [Matthew Horne](Mathew_Horne "wikilink") on
[Gavin and Stacey](Gavin_&_Stacey "wikilink") in British
[BBC](BBC "wikilink") TV during the late 2000s. The jacket is an
enduring style staple, seen regularly on Mod rock artist [Paul
Weller](Paul_Weller "wikilink") through his career and worn by such as
the actor [Martin Freeman](Martin_Freeman "wikilink") who is a Mod style
advocate. Inspired by such as Paul Weller, [Liam
Gallagher](Liam_Gallagher "wikilink") of Oasis co-founded menswear label
[Pretty Green](Pretty_Green_(brand) "wikilink") based on 1960s style
originally which includes their version of the Harrington jacket.

Most jackets in the style worn by subcultures were not the original
manufacturers with cheaper versions available by high street retailers,
on market stalls, in Army & General stores and later on the internet.
General USA menswear retailers such as [Gap](Gap_Inc. "wikilink"), [L L
Bean](L.L.Bean "wikilink") or [Lands End](Lands'_End "wikilink") will
usually have a generic version of the jacket.

In France, HARRINGTON has been a registered trademark since 1985. [8]
though in key markets such as UK, USA and Japan the term 'harrington' is
used by many companies.

In 2007, Baracuta released three special edition G9 jackets with quotes
by Presley, McQueen, and Sinatra printed on the lining to celebrate the
70th anniversary of the brand.[9]

In Canada and the US, this style and fabric type of lightweight jacket
has traditionally been referred to for well over half a century by most
shoppers as the quintessential "spring jacket", and it has thus been
marketed by mass retailers like K-Mart, Bi-Way, Target, Zellers, Eatons,
Sears and their contemporaries as simply "the spring jacket".

Advocates of USA 'Ivy League' style clothing are fans of the jacket
which is part of its staple wardrobe. Books such as Take Ivy covering
USA university campus wear in the mid 1960s show the jacket. The
association with American Ivy League and classic British menswear has
also made the Harrington popular in Japan, especially in the original
heritage brands of Baracuta, Brooks Brothers and Grenfell plus British
original brands such as [Paul
Smith](Paul_Smith_(fashion_designer) "wikilink") and
[Aquascutum](Aquascutum "wikilink") (now Japanese owned) who are popular
there in addition to harringtons from local companies including
[Uniqlo](Uniqlo "wikilink") and [Beams](Beams "wikilink").

Over time the jacket has become merged to a degree with the generically
collared windcheater, so the jacket may not always have the raised
double button collar, ribbed cuff and waist or internal Tartan pattern
that is intrinsic to the original design. These will likely not be
considered truly as a 'Harrington' by those looking for the original
form. The popular version sold by USA menswear outdoor clothing retailer
[London Fog](London_Fog_(company) "wikilink") had a combined form with
the upper raised collar but the windcheater body. The collared version
often called a Windcheater is the version sold by popular USA companies
such as [Ralph Lauren](Ralph_Lauren_Corporation "wikilink"),
[Gant](Gant_(retailer) "wikilink"), [Woolrich](Woolrich "wikilink") and
[Tommy Hilfiger](Tommy_Hilfiger_(company) "wikilink"). [Brooks
Brothers](Brooks_Brothers "wikilink") make their own version.
O'Connell's sell a USA made 'Baracuta' Harrington in their own name. Ben
Silver sells the original Grenfell. Luxury British clothier
[Burberry](Burberry "wikilink") also uses both the Harrington and
windcheater style with the Harrington name. The term Harrington may be
used interchangeably leading to some confusion.

The jacket was worn by [Daniel Craig](Daniel_Craig "wikilink") as [Agent
007](Agent_007 "wikilink") in the [James
Bond](James_Bond_(literary_character) "wikilink") film [Quantum of
Solace](Quantum_of_Solace "wikilink") in a new black design by [Tom
Ford](Tom_Ford "wikilink"). The British clothing company
[Barbour](J._Barbour_and_Sons "wikilink") has been inventive with the
jacket introducing versions with elements from their traditional country
clothing and incorporating motorbike rider styling in their [Steve
McQueen](Steve_McQueen "wikilink") inspired collections. Similarly, many
modern interpretations now use different materials, treatments, colours
and patterns to update the classic jacket with a bespoke version.
However, it is the original style in navy blue or stone/beige that
endures beyond fashions as the style reference point.

There are many hundreds of variants available from companies such as
[Orvis](Orvis "wikilink") in the US, [Fred
Perry](Fred_Perry_(disambiguation) "wikilink"), [Ben
Sherman](Ben_Sherman "wikilink"), [Private White VC (based in Manchester
and one of the original makers of the Harrington for various
brands)](Private_White_VC_(based_in_Manchester_and_one_of_the_original_makers_of_the_Harrington_for_various_brands) "wikilink"),
[Lacoste](Lacoste "wikilink"), [Levis](Levi's "wikilink"), [Lyle &
Scott](Lyle_&_Scott "wikilink"), [Viyella](Viyella "wikilink"), [Le Coq
Sportif](Le_Coq_Sportif "wikilink"), Farah Clothing,
[Sunspel](Sunspel "wikilink"), Gloverall (famous for their duffle
coats), Peter Christian, French Connection and new high end in-country
manufacture companies. Additionally there are many low cost imitators
online that have the look superficially but often at far lower quality
than the original basis of production. The subcultural association
continues with a range of heritage labels mentioned already plus own
label productions from such as [Tootal](Tootal "wikilink"), Jump The
Gun, Gabicci, Merc, Original Penguin, Mapcap, Ben Nevis and many others.

The Harrington in both its original and windcheater related form remain
popular for golf with many specific brands producing versions for the
sport. Of note in this area is enduring British heritage brand
[Wolsey](Wolsey_(clothing) "wikilink") who have produced versions made
in [Leicester](Leicester "wikilink"), England for decades that are
popular for both menswear and golf. Scottish knitwear companies [Lyle &
Scott](Lyle_&_Scott "wikilink") and
[Pringle](Pringle_of_Scotland "wikilink") also have developed their own
Harringtons based on earlier golf jackets from their heritage. Many
Harringtons evolve from sporting heritage as seen in tennis jacket
origins of Harringtons rather than golf at Fred Perry, Lacoste and Le
Coq Sportif.

Over time the pure cotton basis of the original jacket has often given
way to include become a polyester mix at lower customer prices to
enhance the water resistance of the jacket, although the dense cotton
count of the originals meant they already had this quality at a higher
price point.

Fans of the original jacket in its various brands may search out new old
stock or vintage items via online marketplaces or vintage shops.
Baracuta, Grenfell and McGregor in particular all have loyal fans who
seek out their original jackets.

The Harrington is a recurring reference point for enduring style and
subcultural cool that endures beyond fashions after four decades. It
continues to be interpreted and reproduced continually with new versions
issued every year.[10] It's comparable simplicity, lightness, ability to
be reinterpreted and variation at differing cost points produces
opportunities for it to reconnect across successive decades and trends.
Even if its origins can sometimes be lost after the length of time it
has been produced, the original form and two manufacturers of Baracuta
who are most known about and Grenfell remain the original reference
point for them all.

## References

[Category:1960s fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1980s fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:British fashion](Category:British_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]