A **jean jacket**, also called a **denim jacket** or **trucker jacket**,
is a [jacket](jacket "wikilink") made from [denim](denim "wikilink").
Introduced in the [United States](United_States "wikilink") in the late
19th century, it has been a popular type of casual apparel with both men
and women and has been described as an iconic element of [American
fashion](American_fashion "wikilink"). Though a staple of [western
wear](western_wear "wikilink"), the jean jacket has also enjoyed a more
general appeal.

## History

The first recorded jean jacket was created in the United States in about
1880 by [Levi Strauss](Levi_Strauss "wikilink"), approximately ten years
after he had invented [jeans](jeans "wikilink") as a new type of work
apparel intended for use by [cowboys](cowboy "wikilink"),
[miners](miner "wikilink"), and railroad workers.[1] The "Type III"
denim jacket, introduced by Levis Strauss & Co. in 1962, has been
described as the jean jacket "to rule them all".[2] Also known as "the
trucker jacket", design elements of the Type III include a tapered
style, welt hand pockets, and bar tacks which hold down chest pocket and
sleeve openings.[3]

In 2017, [Google](Google "wikilink") collaborated with Levi Strauss &
Co. to develop a "connected" jean jacket described by
*[Wired](Wired_(magazine) "wikilink")* as the "jean jacket of the
future".[4] The underlying technology, named "Jacquard," encompassed a
processor, a built-in battery, and a special yarn that gave the bottom
of the arm a pseudo-[touchscreen](touchscreen "wikilink")
functionality.[5] The same year, [New York Fashion
Week](New_York_Fashion_Week "wikilink") featured several jean jackets,
with *[The Guardian](The_Guardian "wikilink")* predicting that the jean
jacket would "be everywhere in 2018".[6] A second version of the
Jacquard jacket, featuring an appearance closer to jackets without the
technology as well as a lower price, was released in late 2019.[7]

In addition to Levi Strauss & Co., other designers of jean jackets have
included [Wrangler](Wrangler_(jeans) "wikilink"), [Calvin
Klein](Calvin_Klein "wikilink"), [Tom Ford](Tom_Ford "wikilink"),
[Gucci](Gucci "wikilink"), and [Dior](Dior "wikilink"), among others.[8]
![](Women_with_Jean_Jacket.ogv "fig:Women_with_Jean_Jacket.ogv")

## Cultural impact

According to *[GQ](GQ_(magazine) "wikilink")*, there are "few things
more iconic, more innately American, than a denim jacket" and the
magazine has called it "a staple for stylish men".[9][10] Jean jackets
have also been popular with women.[11]

Jean jackets, like jeans, are a major element of western wear, however,
also like jeans, have enjoyed a more general appeal.[12] Notable wearers
of jean jackets have included western entertainers [James
Dean](James_Dean "wikilink") and [John
Lennon](John_Lennon "wikilink"),[13] as well as Polish anti-Communist
dissident [Jacek Kuroń](Jacek_Kuroń "wikilink").[14] In 2017 *GQ* opined
that [Kanye West](Kanye_West "wikilink") seemed to own "an alarming
number of jean jackets", remarking that "he doesn't seem to go a few
days without wearing one".[15]

According to [Levi Strauss & Co.](Levi_Strauss_&_Co. "wikilink"), the
jean jacket has traditionally appealed to nonconformists as "a knock to
the 'suits' of the world, its informal yet edgy heritage making it the
ideal item to stick it to [the man](the_man "wikilink")".[16]

## Wear and styling

While jean jackets are predominantly found in blue, denim can be dyed
any color achievable with cotton, so jackets in colors such as white and
violet also exist.[17] As with jeans themselves, it is possible to buy
"raw" or "dry" denim jean jackets, which have not been washed or
distressed at the factory and instead fade and break in naturally over
time with wear.[18] Jean jackets with sherpa lining for warmth are
available.[19]

### Canadian tuxedo

A "Canadian tuxedo" is a colloquial term for wearing a jean jacket with
jeans.[20] The term reportedly originated in 1951 after [Bing
Crosby](Bing_Crosby "wikilink") was refused entry to a hotel in Canada
due to wearing a denim top and denim bottoms.[21][22] After learning of
the incident, Levi Strauss & Co. designed a [tuxedo](tuxedo "wikilink")
made entirely of denim as a publicity stunt.[23] Though long considered
a fashion [faux pas](wikt:faux_pas "wikilink") outside of work apparel,
the Canadian tuxedo achieved a "pop cultural peak" in 2001 when [Britney
Spears](Britney_Spears "wikilink") and [Justin
Timberlake](Justin_Timberlake "wikilink") wore the combination to that
year's [American Music
Awards](American_Music_Awards "wikilink").[24][25][26] In 2016 [Prime
Minister of Canada](Prime_Minister_of_Canada "wikilink") [Justin
Trudeau](Justin_Trudeau "wikilink") wore a "Canadian tuxedo" to a
concert by [The Tragically Hip](The_Tragically_Hip "wikilink").[27]
[Lady Gaga](Lady_Gaga "wikilink") has also worn a Canadian tuxedo in
public.[28]

## Gallery

<File:Reagan_with_horse.jpg%7Calt1=>[Ronald
Reagan](Ronald_Reagan "wikilink") wearing a jean jacket at Rancho Del
Cielo in 1977\|[Ronald Reagan](Ronald_Reagan "wikilink") wearing a jean
jacket at Rancho del Cielo in 1977 <File:Denim_jacket.jpg%7CA> man shown
wearing a jean jacket as part of a "Canadian tuxedo" in 2007 <File:Jean>
Jacket with a Black Floral Romper, Black Tights, and Cutout Boots.jpg\|A
woman wearing a jean jacket in 2015

## See also

-   [Blazer](Blazer "wikilink")
-   [Sport coat](Sport_coat "wikilink")

## Notes

## References

[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:Jeans by
type](Category:Jeans_by_type "wikilink") [Category:American
clothing](Category:American_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]