![](Messkit1.jpg "fig:Messkit1.jpg") The **mess jacket** is a type of
formal jacket that ends at the waist. It features either a non-fastening
double breast cut or a single-breasted version that fastens.[1] The
jackets have shawl or peak [lapels](lapel "wikilink"). Used in military
[mess dress](mess_dress "wikilink"), during the 1930s it became a
popular alternative to the white dinner jacket in hot and tropical
weather for [black tie](black_tie "wikilink") occasions. It also was
prominently used, in single-breasted form, as part of the uniform for
underclassmen at [Eton College](Eton_College "wikilink"), leading to the
alternate name **Eton jacket**.[2] Its origin was a
**[spencer](spencer_(clothing) "wikilink")**, a tail-less adaptation of
the [tailcoat](tailcoat "wikilink") worn by both men and women during
the [Regency period](Regency_period "wikilink").

## History

The waist-length style of jacket first appeared in the 1790s when
[George Spencer, 2nd Earl
Spencer](George_Spencer,_2nd_Earl_Spencer "wikilink") removed the tails
from his [tailcoat](tailcoat "wikilink").[3] Spencer, it was thought,
singed the tails of his tailcoat while standing beside a fire and then
cut off the ends, unwittingly starting a new fashion.[4] Other stories
say Spencer—frustrated by his tails catching on
[brambles](bramble "wikilink")—tore the tails off his coat when hunting
one day.[5] In the early 1800s, Eton College adopted it for first year
students' uniforms; it was referred to as an Eton jacket.[6][7]
Civilians first adopted a white mess jacket in 1933 to wear in the hot
and tropical weather of Palm Beach.[8]

The mess jacket soon fell out of fashion for two main reasons. One is
that the jacket only worked well with an athletic and slim fit. The
other reason is that the mess jacket had gone on to be worn by
musicians, bellhops and waiters, leading the class conscious of the era
to abandon the garment. It is still used in service industries.[9]

![](St_John_Ambulance_of_Canada_officers_in_mess_dress.jpg "St_John_Ambulance_of_Canada_officers_in_mess_dress.jpg")

Today, the jacket continues to be used as part of military mess dress.
It was adopted as part of mess dress, the military formal eveningwear
equivalent to civilian [white tie](white_tie "wikilink") and [black
tie](black_tie "wikilink").

## References

## External links

-

[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:1790s
fashion](Category:1790s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1820s
fashion](Category:1820s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1930s
fashion](Category:1930s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Semi-formal
wear](Category:Semi-formal_wear "wikilink")

[1] [Entry at
blacktieguide.com](http://www.blacktieguide.com/Contemporary/Contemp_Alternatives.htm)
Accessed August 4, 2012\].

[2]

[3]

[4] [Regency Fashion History. 1800s Costume
History](http://www.fashion-era.com/regency_fashion.htm#Earl%20Spencer%20And%20The%20Short%20Spencer%20Jacket%201795),
by Pauline Weston Thomas for Fashion-Era.com

[5] [Making a Man's
Tailcoat](http://www.northwestjournal.ca/VIII11.htm), by J. Gottfred.

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]