![](Pursuivant_tabard.jpg "fig:Pursuivant_tabard.jpg")'s tabard\]\] A
**tabard** is a type of short coat that was commonly worn by men during
the [late Middle Ages](late_Middle_Ages "wikilink") and [early modern
period](early_modern_period "wikilink") in Europe. Generally worn
outdoors, the coat was either sleeveless or had short sleeves or
shoulder pieces. In its more developed form it was open at the sides,
and it could be worn with or without a belt. Though most were ordinary
garments, often workclothes, tabards might be emblazoned on the front
and back with a [coat of arms](heraldry "wikilink")
([livery](livery "wikilink")), and in this form they survive as the
distinctive garment of [officers of arms](Officer_of_Arms "wikilink").

In modern [British](British_English "wikilink") usage, the term has been
revived for what is known in American English as a [cobbler
apron](Apron#Tabard "wikilink"): a lightweight open-sided upper
overgarment, of similar design to its medieval and heraldic counterpart,
worn in particular by workers in the catering, cleaning and healthcare
industries as [protective
clothing](Personal_protective_equipment "wikilink"), or outdoors by
those requiring [high-visibility
clothing](high-visibility_clothing "wikilink"). Tabards may also be worn
by [percussionists](percussionist "wikilink") in [marching
bands](marching_band "wikilink") in order to protect their uniforms from
the straps and rigging used to support the instruments.

## Middle Ages

![](the_waterseller_walters.jpg "fig:the_waterseller_walters.jpg")*by
[Diego Velázquez](Diego_Velázquez "wikilink"), c.1620, depicting a
functional workman's tabard\]\] A tabard (from the French*tabarde*) was
originally a humble outer garment of tunic form, generally without
sleeves, worn by peasants, monks and foot-soldiers. In this sense, the
earliest citation recorded in the*[Oxford English
Dictionary](Oxford_English_Dictionary "wikilink")'' dates from
c.1300.[1]

By the second half of the 15th century, tabards, now open at the sides
and so usually belted, were also being worn by
[knights](knight "wikilink") in military contexts over their
[armour](armour "wikilink"), and were usually emblazoned with their arms
(though sometimes worn plain). The *Oxford English Dictionary* first
records this use of the word in English in 1450.[2] Tabards were
apparently distinguished from [surcoats](surcoat "wikilink") by being
open-sided, and by being shorter. In its later form, a tabard normally
comprised four textile panels – two large panels hanging down the
wearer's front and back, and two smaller panels hanging over his arms as
shoulder-pieces or open "sleeves" – each emblazoned with the same coat
of arms. Tabards became an important means of battlefield identification
with the development of plate armour as the use of shields declined.
They are frequently represented on [tomb effigies](Effigy "wikilink")
and [monumental brasses](monumental_brass "wikilink") of the late 15th
and early 16th centuries.

A very expensive, but plain, garment described as a tabard is worn by
[Giovanni Arnolfini](Giovanni_Arnolfini "wikilink") in the [Arnolfini
Portrait](Arnolfini_Portrait "wikilink") of 1434 ([National Gallery,
London](National_Gallery,_London "wikilink")). This may be made of
[silk](silk "wikilink") and or [velvet](velvet "wikilink"), and is
trimmed and fully lined with fur, possibly [sable](sable "wikilink").[3]

At [The Queen's College](The_Queen's_College "wikilink"),
[Oxford](Oxford "wikilink"), the scholars on the foundation were called
tabarders, from the tabard (not in this case an emblazoned garment)
which they wore.[4]

A surviving garment similar to the medieval tabard is the monastic
[scapular](scapular "wikilink"). This is a wide strip of fabric worn
front back of the body, with an opening for the head and no sleeves. It
may have a hood, and may be worn under or over a belt.

## British heraldry

![](Thomas_Hawley_Clarenceux_King_of_Arms.jpg "fig:Thomas_Hawley_Clarenceux_King_of_Arms.jpg"),
[Clarenceux King of Arms](Clarenceux_King_of_Arms "wikilink"), depicted
in his tabard on a [grant of arms](grant_of_arms "wikilink") of 1556\]\]
By the end of the 16th century, the tabard was particularly associated
with officers of arms. The shift in emphasis was reported by [John
Stow](John_Stow "wikilink") in 1598, when he described a tabard as:

In the case of Royal officers of arms, the tabard is emblazoned with the
coat of arms of the sovereign. [Private officers of
arms](Private_Officer_of_Arms "wikilink"), such as still exist in
[Scotland](Scotland "wikilink"), make use of tabards emblazoned with the
coat of arms of the person who employs them. In the [United
Kingdom](United_Kingdom "wikilink") the different ranks of officers of
arms can be distinguished by the fabric from which their tabards are
made. The tabard of a [king of arms](King_of_Arms "wikilink") is made of
[velvet](velvet "wikilink"), the tabard of a [herald of
arms](herald "wikilink") of [satin](satin "wikilink"), and that of a
[pursuivant of arms](pursuivant "wikilink") of damask
[silk](silk "wikilink").[5] The oldest surviving English herald's tabard
is that of Sir [William Dugdale](William_Dugdale "wikilink") as [Garter
King of Arms](Garter_Principal_King_of_Arms "wikilink") (1677–1686).[6]

It was at one time the custom for English pursuivants to wear their
tabards "athwart", that is to say with the smaller ("shoulder") panels
at the front and back, and the larger panels over the arms; but this
practice was ended during the reign of [James II and
VII](James_II_of_England "wikilink").[7][8]

The derisive [Scots](Scots_language "wikilink") nickname of "" for [John
Balliol](John_Balliol "wikilink") (c. 1249 – 1314) may originate from
either an alleged incident where his arms were stripped from his tabard
in public,[9] or a reference to the Balliol arms which are a plain
shield with an [orle](Orle_(heraldry) "wikilink"), also known as an
*inescutcheon voided*.[10]

## Canadian heraldry

In the [Diamond Jubilee](Diamond_Jubilee_of_Elizabeth_II "wikilink")
year of the [Queen of Canada](Queen_of_Canada "wikilink"), the [Governor
General](Governor_General_of_Canada "wikilink") unveiled a new tabard
for the use of the [Chief Herald of
Canada](Chief_Herald_of_Canada "wikilink"). This new royal blue tabard,
for exclusively Canadian use and of uniquely Canadian design, is a
modern take on the traditional look. The tabard differs from others of
more traditional design in that the [Canadian royal
arms](Royal_Arms_of_Canada "wikilink") appear on the sleeves, while the
front and back of the tabard are covered with Native Canadian-inspired
emblematic representations of the raven-polar bears of the [Canadian
Heraldic Authority](Canadian_Heraldic_Authority "wikilink")'s [coat of
arms](coat_of_arms "wikilink").

## Gallery

Herald Gelre of the Duke of Gueldres.jpg\|Gelre Herald to the [Duke of
Guelders](Guelders "wikilink"), c.1380 JoanBeaufortandJames.jpg\|[James
I](James_I_of_Scotland "wikilink"), King of Scotland 1406–1437, and his
wife [Joan Beaufort](Joan_Beaufort,_Queen_of_Scots "wikilink") Rubbing
of the Denys funerary brass, Saint Mary the Virgin, Olveston,
Gloucestershire, England.jpg\|Tabards displaying
[quartered](Quarter_(heraldry) "wikilink") coats of arms on front and
sleeves: the [Denys brass](Denys_brass,_Olveston "wikilink") of 1505,
[Olveston](Olveston "wikilink"), Gloucestershire Pompa funebris Albert
Ardux - Heravlts de Flandria.jpg\|Heraldic tabards worn at the funeral
of [Albert VII, Archduke of
Austria](Albert_VII,_Archduke_of_Austria "wikilink"), in Brussels in
1622 Lelyvanda.jpg\|A pursuivant wearing his tabard "athwart". A drawing
by [Peter Lely](Peter_Lely "wikilink") from the 1660s.
St_John_the_Baptist_Wearing_the_Red_Tabard_of_the_Order_of_St_John_-_Mattia_Preti.jpg\|*[St
John the Baptist Wearing the Red Tabard of the Order of St
John](St_John_the_Baptist_Wearing_the_Red_Tabard_of_the_Order_of_St_John_(Mattia_Preti) "wikilink")*
(1671) by [Mattia Preti](Mattia_Preti "wikilink") Peter
O'Donoghue.jpg\|[Peter
O'Donoghue](Peter_O'Donoghue_(officer_of_arms) "wikilink"), [Bluemantle
Pursuivant](Bluemantle_Pursuivant "wikilink"), photographed in 2006
Baker's wife.jpg\|A modern protective tabard worn by a bakery worker
Manx grand prix 2010 1823.JPG\|Orange high-visibility tabards worn by
competitive motorcyclists

## Cultural allusions

A tabard was the [inn sign](inn_sign "wikilink") of the [Tabard
Inn](The_Tabard "wikilink") in [Southwark](Southwark "wikilink"),
London, established in 1307 and remembered as the starting point for
[Geoffrey Chaucer](Geoffrey_Chaucer "wikilink")'s pilgrims on their
journey to [Canterbury](Canterbury "wikilink") in *[The Canterbury
Tales](The_Canterbury_Tales "wikilink")*, dating from about the 1380s.

In [E. C. Bentley](Edmund_Clerihew_Bentley "wikilink")'s short story
"The genuine tabard", published in his collection *Trent Intervenes* in
1938, a wealthy American couple purchase an antique heraldic tabard,
having been told that it was worn in 1783 by Sir Rowland Verey, [Garter
King of Arms](Garter_King_of_Arms "wikilink"), when proclaiming the
[Peace of Versailles](Peace_of_Paris_(1783) "wikilink") from the steps
of [St James's Palace](St_James's_Palace "wikilink"): the amateur
detective Philip Trent is able to point out that it in fact bears the
post-1837 [royal
arms](Royal_coat_of_arms_of_the_United_Kingdom#After_the_Acts_of_Union_1707 "wikilink").[11]

## See also

-   [Apron](Apron "wikilink")
-   [Heraldry](Heraldry "wikilink")
-   [Surcoat](Surcoat "wikilink")

## References

<references/>

[Category:Military uniforms](Category:Military_uniforms "wikilink")
[Category:Heraldry](Category:Heraldry "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:Medieval costume](Category:Medieval_costume "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]