![](A_Member_of_the_Queen's_Guards,_Guarding_the_Mall_-_geograph.org.uk_-_1354107.jpg "fig:A_Member_of_the_Queen's_Guards,_Guarding_the_Mall_-_geograph.org.uk_-_1354107.jpg")
wearing a ceremonial tunic in 2009.\]\] A **military tunic** is a type
of medium length [coat](Coat_(clothing) "wikilink") or
[jacket](jacket "wikilink"), the lower hem of which reaches down to the
thighs all the way round. It is named after the
[tunic](tunic "wikilink"), a garment of similar length worn in [Ancient
Rome](Ancient_Rome "wikilink").

## Development

In the second half of the seventeenth and into the eighteenth century,
European soldiers wore a coat of a similar style to the civilian
[justacorps](justacorps "wikilink"), which had wide skirts and was
decorated with lace at the front and had broad cuffs. As the eighteenth
century progressed, coats became tighter and broad
[lapels](lapel "wikilink") to expose the [facing
colour](facing_colour "wikilink") were introduced, initially in the
[Prussian Army](Prussian_Army "wikilink"). The skirts of the coat were
turned back to form tails; this was initially a mark of the
[dragoon](dragoon "wikilink") [cavalry](cavalry "wikilink"), but was
soon adopted by the [infantry](infantry "wikilink") too.[1] By the start
of the nineteenth century, this had evolved into a jacket that was cut
to waist level at the front and had a short tail behind; in the [British
Army](British_Army "wikilink"), this was called a
"[coatee](coatee "wikilink")".[2] A coat with a skirt that reached down
to thigh length had been introduced into both the
[Russian](Imperial_Russian_Army "wikilink") and Prussian armies at the
end of the Napoleonic Wars, but was not widely adopted. However, by the
end of the 1830s, there was a feeling that uniforms didn't offer
soldiers sufficient protection from the elements or freedom of movement.
While Russia experimented again with the tunic, Prussia adopted them for
their whole army in 1842.[3]

## Adoption

France followed Prussia's lead, introducing a tunic for their line
infantry in 1845.[4] In 1851, the [US Army](US_Army "wikilink")
introduced a long type of tunic which they called a "frock coat".[5] The
British eventually followed suit in 1855, their initial French-style
[double breasted](double_breasted "wikilink") tunic being replaced by a
[single breasted](single_breasted "wikilink") version in the following
year.[6] The tunic became almost universal military wear; at the start
of the twentieth century, when the need for some kind of concealment
became apparent, armies changed to drab coloured uniforms, the British
and Americans in 1902, the Germans in 1910.[7] In the British Army, the
tunic continued as a field uniform until the introduction of [British
Battledress](British_Battledress "wikilink") in 1938;[8] the tunic
continues to be worn for formal and ceremonial occasions.

## Non-military use

The military tunic was quickly adopted by civilian organisations that
needed a smart and practical uniform. It was introduced into the [Royal
Mail](Royal_Mail "wikilink") in 1868,[9] and by the [Metropolitan
Police](Metropolitan_Police "wikilink") in 1864, replacing a
tail-coat.[10]

## Gallery

<File:Prussian> Army Uniforms 1845.jpg\|Prussian soldiers in tunics,
1845. <File:Garde> nationale mobile pendant les Journ√©es de Juin.JPG\|A
member of the [*Garde nationale
mobile*](National_Guard_(France) "wikilink") in 1848, showing the
long-skirted French Army tunic. <File:CharlesGriffin.jpg%7CA> Captain
the [United States Army](United_States_Army "wikilink") during the 1860s
wearing the long tunic or "[frock coat](frock_coat "wikilink")" adopted
in 1851. <File:Crimean> War 1854-56 Q71633.jpg\|A Sergeant Major of the
[Scots Fusilier Guards](Scots_Guards "wikilink") wearing the [double
breasted](double_breasted "wikilink") tunic briefly adopted by the
British Army in 1855. <File:Charles> Becker, ca. 1912.jpg\|A Lieutenant
of the [New York City Police
Department](New_York_City_Police_Department "wikilink") in 1912.
<File:Regimenal> Sgt. Major Cox of the Leicesters (Photo 24-351).jpg\|A
Sergeant Major of the [Leicestershire
Regiment](Royal_Leicestershire_Regiment "wikilink") during the [First
World War](First_World_War "wikilink") in the 1907 pattern [Service
Dress](Service_Dress_(British_Army) "wikilink") tunic, with large patch
pockets and a "rise-and-fall" collar. <File:Taking> instructions from a
staff officer France (Photo 24-314).jpg\|Two British [staff
officers](staff_officers "wikilink") wearing the officer's 1913 version
of the Service Dress tunic, which featured an open collar revealing a
shirt and tie below. <File:Sir> William Boog Leishman and Hyacinthe
Vincent. Photograph Wellcome L0002818.jpg\|Senior British and French
officers in 1925 showing contrasting styles of formal uniforms.
<File:International> Piccadilly- Overseas Troops in London, 1942
D9793.jpg\|An officer of the [Royal Netherlands
Army](Royal_Netherlands_Army "wikilink") asks directions from a
[Metropolitan Police](Metropolitan_Police "wikilink") Officer in London,
1942. <File:Panmunjeom> inside barack.jpg\|Soldiers of the [North Korean
Army](North_Korean_Army "wikilink") in 2005.

## References

[Category:Coats (clothing)](Category:Coats_(clothing) "wikilink")
[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:Military
uniforms](Category:Military_uniforms "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")

[1] Kannik, Preben (1968), *Military Uniforms of the World in Colour*,
Blandford Press Ltd, (pp. 160-161)

[2] Kannik, p.270

[3] Kannik, p.208

[4] Kannik, p.212

[5] Kannik, p.216

[6] Beckett, Ian F W (2007), [*Discovering British Regimental
Traditions*](https://books.google.com/books?id=SYWr-ljWbuQC&pg=PA89&dq=tunic+1855&hl=en&sa=X&ei=toMPU76HMKuT0AWKyYDACw&ved=0CGAQ6AEwCQ#v=onepage&q=tunic%201855&f=false)
Shire Publications Ltd (p. 89)

[7] Kannik, pp.234-239

[8] Kannik, p.245

[9]

[10]