A **wamus** is a type of [jacket](jacket "wikilink") worn in America.
The term is applied to several different types of upper-body garment.

## Early American history

One of the more consistent uses of wamus is to describe a fringed
leather tunic that slips over the head.[1][2] For early [American
pioneer](American_pioneer "wikilink") families in the [Southern United
States](Southern_United_States "wikilink"), the buckskin (later, cloth)
wamus was widely worn by young and pre-teen boys in the late 18th and
very early 19th century.[3] The wamus, if it opened down the front, was
either laced shut or held closed with a belt, with dressier versions
made from [elk](elk "wikilink") skin.[4] If made from cloth, the wamus
was dyed blue and trimmed with yellow fringe.[5]

As worn by the [Lakota people](Lakota_people "wikilink"), the wamus was
a ceremonial tunic which was coloured to represent the type of person
the wearer was, as well as painted with [mnemonic](mnemonic "wikilink")
designs.[6] Traditionally, if a warrior had
[scalped](scalping "wikilink") his enemy, he was allowed to trim his
wamus with human hair cut from the heads of mourning women in addition
to the cut fringe.[7]

## Later history

The wamus eventually came to describe a sleeved jacket or cardigan,
typically with buttoned wristbands and a belt-like waistband, in which
format, it was also sometimes called a **roundabout**.[8][9][10]

For Sunday best and other special occasions [Amish](Amish "wikilink")
men wear a jacket called a wamus, distinct from the 'mutze'
traditionally worn for preaching.[11][12]

## References

[Category:Jackets](Category:Jackets "wikilink") [Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:American
clothing](Category:American_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Native
American clothing](Category:Native_American_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]