**Ballerina skirt** is a full [skirt](skirt "wikilink") that reaches to
mid-calf or just above the [ankles](Ankle "wikilink"), worn as a costume
in a ballet performance. It is often made up of multiple layers of
fabric.[1] It was a popular casual skirt style during the 1950s.

Ballerina skirts have been a consistently popular length for formal
dresses, especially for young [women](women "wikilink"). The most
persistent image of a ballerina skirt is that worn by the most famous
ballerina [Anna Pavlova](Anna_Pavlova "wikilink"). Early ballerina
skirts were heavy, bulky and unwieldy, severely restricting the dancer's
movements. By the early twentieth century, skirts were raised to the
knees to showcase pointe work.[2]

The Ballerina skirt is typically made up of five to 12 layers of tulle
fabric. A ballerina skirt typically allows the wearer to seem more
beautiful, feminine and elegant, as well as being associated with the
traditional costume for classical ballet performances.

Different types of the ballerina skirts are used in ballet performance
including the romantic, classic, pancake, balanchine and platter skirts.
![](Chopiniana_Baku.jpg "fig:Chopiniana_Baku.jpg")''\]\]

## History

From the early 1550, Roman dress had a strong influence on costume
design: silk skirts were voluminous and key details were often
exaggerated, that was usually based on everyday wear. During the
seventeenth century, silks, satins and other fabrics were embroidered
with real gold and precious stones that increased the level of
decoration with ballet costumes, however, the heavy garments and
supporting structures did not allow the dancers to perform graceful
gestures.[3]

During the early 1700s the *panier*, a hooped petticoat was just
invented that help raised the skirts a few inches off the ground. When
the Romantic movement came about, ballet costumes were emphasized to be
more tight fitting.[4] The romantic tutu came about in Paris in 1832
when [Marie Taglioni](Marie_Taglioni "wikilink") premiered in the skirt
in the ballet *La Sylphide*.[5] The skirt is a bell-shaped calf length
style; it falls halfway between the knees and ankles and it was made of
layers of stiffened tarlatan or starched, sheer cotton muslin that gave
the illusion of fullness without being weighty. By 1870 other ballerinas
began wearing tutus cut above the knee allowing to show complicated
footwork with ruffled underpants attached to the skirt.[6]

Ballet skirts began to get shorter during the 20<sup>th</sup> century.
Some ballet skirt had tarlatan layers which help create a
flared-from-the body effect. In the 1940s wire hoops were inserted to
enable the skirt to stand out from the hips. Tulle soon replace tarlatan
making the hoop an option rather than being a necessity.[7] The most
common style today is the short skirt which appeared in the late
nineteenth century and it is made of different materials ranging from
fluffy to thin fabrics.[8]

## See also

-   [Tutu](Tutu_(clothing) "wikilink")
-   [The Australian Ballet-The
    Tutu](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uef0wVoX3fw&t=159s)

## References

<references group="" responsive="1">
</references>

## External links




[Category:Dancewear](Category:Dancewear "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")

[1] Valerie Cumming, C. W. Cunnington, P. E. Cunnington, *The Dictionary
of Fashion History*, Berg, 2010, p 11

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]