![](Mozambique_01200_(5054130545).jpg "fig:Mozambique_01200_(5054130545).jpg")
woman using a capulana.\]\] A **capulana** (also spelled "Kapulana," or
in Changana "nguvu" or "vemba") is a type of a
[sarong](sarong "wikilink") worn primarily in
[Mozambique](Mozambique "wikilink") but also in other areas of
south-eastern Africa. It is a length of material about 2 metres by 1
metre. It can either be used as a wrap-around skirt, dress or can become
a [baby carrier](baby_carrier "wikilink") on the back. It is considered
a complete piece of clothing.

Capulanas have been in Mozambique since the establishment of the
Arab/Indian trade routes. It was received from Indian traders as a means
of trade for other goods. First, they came primarily in three colors:
red, white, and black. White represented the protection of the
ancestors, black represented evil, and red represented the spirit of
war. After this time, Mozambicans preferred using Capulanas to the
traditionally-used animal skins. Due to Africa's wildlife and
environment, the most common early designs included suns, leopards,
lions, the style "ndjiti" (a white and red geometric design), the style
"xithango" (plaid, with the word meaning literally "condom"), and the
style "ximangelani" (ducks). These styles were dominant until the advent
of the Portuguese Colonial power. Today, these early styles of capulana
are used primarily by "tinyanga" (witch doctors, spirit healers,
"curandeiros"). "Palu," a style with very small plaid patterns in blue
and white, was also popular in early years of the capulana.

Today, there are many kinds of Capulanas of various designs and colors.
They are used in a variety of manners, including everyday casual-wear,
carrying heavy loads, or even careful tailored for special events. Early
traditional colors and styles of capulana are highly coveted and sell
for higher prices in markets today. In Mozambique they have a high value
and are considered particularly beautiful.

Brightly colored, Capulana are often offered as gifts to women. Some
couples make matching "Kapulana" outfits for special events or for a
significant reason such as a traditional marriage between the two. .[1]

## Notes

## External links

[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink") [Category:Fashion
accessories](Category:Fashion_accessories "wikilink")
[Category:Mozambican clothing](Category:Mozambican_clothing "wikilink")

[1]