A **crinoline** is a stiff or structured
[petticoat](petticoat "wikilink") designed to hold out a woman's skirt,
popular at various times since the mid-19th century. Originally,
crinoline described a stiff fabric made of
[horsehair](horsehair "wikilink") ("**crin**") and
[cotton](cotton "wikilink") or [linen](linen "wikilink") which was used
to make underskirts and as a dress lining.

By the [1850s](1850s_in_Western_fashion "wikilink") the term crinoline
was more usually applied to the fashionable silhouette provided by
horsehair petticoats, and to the [hoop skirts](hoop_skirt "wikilink")
that replaced them in the mid-1850s. In form and function these hoop
skirts were similar to the 16th- and 17th-century
[farthingale](farthingale "wikilink") and to 18th-century
[panniers](pannier_(clothing) "wikilink"), in that they too enabled
skirts to spread even wider and more fully.

The steel-hooped **cage crinoline**, first patented in April 1856 by
R.C. Milliet in Paris, and by their agent in Britain a few months later,
became extremely popular. Steel cage crinolines were mass-produced in
huge quantity, with factories across the Western world producing tens of
thousands in a year. Alternative materials, such as
[whalebone](whalebone "wikilink"), cane,
[gutta-percha](gutta-percha "wikilink") and even inflatable
[caoutchouc](Natural_rubber "wikilink") (natural rubber) were all used
for hoops, although steel was the most popular. At its widest point, the
crinoline could reach a circumference of up to six yards, although by
the late 1860s, crinolines were beginning to reduce in size. By the
early 1870s, the smaller **crinolette** and the
[bustle](bustle "wikilink") had largely replaced the crinoline.

Crinolines were worn by women of every social standing and class across
the Western world, from royalty to factory workers. This led to
widespread media scrutiny and criticism, particularly in satirical
magazines such as *[Punch](Punch_(magazine) "wikilink")*. They were also
hazardous if worn without due care. Thousands of women died in the
mid-19th century as a result of their hooped skirts catching fire.
Alongside fire, other hazards included the hoops being caught in
machinery, carriage wheels, gusts of wind, or other obstacles.

The crinoline silhouette was revived several times in the 20th century,
particularly in the late 1940s as a result of [Christian
Dior](Christian_Dior "wikilink")'s "New Look" of 1947. The flounced
nylon and net petticoats worn in the 1950s and 1960s to poof out skirts
also became known as crinolines even when there were no hoops in their
construction. In the mid-1980s [Vivienne
Westwood](Vivienne_Westwood "wikilink") designed the mini-crini, a
[mini](miniskirt "wikilink")-length crinoline which was highly
influential on [1980s fashion](1980s_in_fashion "wikilink"). Late 20th
and early 21st century designers such as [John
Galliano](John_Galliano "wikilink") and [Alexander
McQueen](Alexander_McQueen "wikilink") have become famous for their
updated crinoline designs. Since the 1980s and well into the 21st
century the crinoline has remained a popular option for formal evening
dresses, wedding dresses, and [ball gowns](ball_gown "wikilink").

## Etymology

The name *crinoline* is often described as a combination of the Latin
word *crinis* ("hair") and/or the French word *crin* ("horsehair"); with
the Latin word *linum* ("thread" or "[flax](flax "wikilink")," which was
used to make [linen](linen "wikilink")), describing the materials used
in the original textile.[1][2][3][4]

## Pre-1850

The crinoline was not the first garment designed to support the wearer's
skirts in a fashionable shape. Whilst the bell-shaped skirts seen on
[statuettes](Snake_Goddess "wikilink") from the ancient [Minoan
civilization](Minoan_civilization "wikilink") are often compared to
crinolines, particularly under the assumption that hoops were required
to retain their shape, there is no evidence to confirm this and the
theory is usually dismissed.[5][6][7] The crinoline's ancestors are more
typically recognised as the Spanish *verdugada*, later known as the
[farthingale](farthingale "wikilink"), widely worn in Europe from the
late 15th century to the early 17th century, and the [side-hoops and
panniers](Pannier_(clothing) "wikilink") worn throughout the 18th
century.[8][9][10]

The horsehair fabric called crinoline was first noted by 1829, when it
was offered for lining and dress-making.[11] That year, [Rudolph
Ackermann](Rudolph_Ackermann "wikilink")'s *Repository of Fashions*
described the new textile as a "fine clear stuff, not unlike in
appearance to [leno](Leno_weave "wikilink"), but of a very strong and
durable description: it is made in different colours; grey, and the
colour of unbleached [cambric](cambric "wikilink") are most in
favour."[12]

Petticoats made of horsehair crinoline appeared around 1839, proving so
successful that the name 'crinoline' began to refer to supportive
petticoats in general, rather than solely to the material.[13] By 1847,
crinoline fabric was being used as a stiffening for skirt linings,
although English women preferred separate crinoline fabric petticoats
which were beginning to collapse under the increasing weight of the
skirts.[14] One alternative to horsehair crinoline was the quilted
petticoat stuffed with down or feathers, such as that reportedly worn in
1842 by Lady Aylesbury.[15] However, quilted skirts were not widely
produced until the early 1850s.[16] In about 1849, it was possible to
buy stiffened and corded cotton fabric for making petticoats, marketed
as 'crinoline,' and designed as a substitute for the horsehair
textile.[17] The artificial crinoline with hoops did not emerge until
the 1850s.[18]

## Late 19th century

![](Woman's_Cage_Crinoline_LACMA_M.2007.211.380.jpg "fig:Woman's_Cage_Crinoline_LACMA_M.2007.211.380.jpg"))\]\]

### 1850s–60s

The cage crinoline made out of [spring steel](spring_steel "wikilink")
wire was first introduced in the 1850s, with the earliest British patent
for a metal crinoline (described as a 'skeleton petticoat of steel
springs fastened to tape.') granted in July 1856.[19][20] Alison
Gernsheim suggests that the unidentified French inventor was probably R.
C. Milliet of [Besançon](Besançon "wikilink"), as the July 1856 patent
was filed by their British agent, C. Amet.[21] Milliet had already
patented a 'tournure de femme' in Paris on 24 April 1856 which was
described as comprising 'elastic extensible circles joined together by
vertical bands.'[22] Following its introduction, the women's rights
advocate [Amelia Bloomer](Amelia_Bloomer "wikilink") felt that her
concerns about the hampering nature of multiple petticoats had been
resolved, and dropped dress reform as an issue.[23] Diana de Marly, in
her biography of the couturier [Charles Frederick
Worth](Charles_Frederick_Worth "wikilink") noted that by 1858 there
existed steel factories catering solely to crinoline manufacturers, and
shops that sold nothing else but crinolines.[24] One of the most
significant manufacturers of crinolines was that of Thomson & Co.,
founded by an American with branches across Europe and the United
States. At the height of their success, up to four thousand crinolines
were produced by Thomson's London factory in a day, whilst another plant
in [Saxony](Saxony "wikilink") manufactured 9.5 million crinolines over
a twelve-year period.[25] In 1859 the New York factory, which employed
about a thousand girls, used 300,000 yards of steel wire every week to
produce between three and four thousand crinolines per day, while the
rival Douglas & Sherwood factory in [Manhattan](Manhattan "wikilink")
used a ton of steel each week in manufacturing hoop skirts.[26]

![](Dressing_for_the_Ball_in_1857,_Punch's_Pocket_Book_(cropped).jpg "fig:Dressing_for_the_Ball_in_1857,_Punch's_Pocket_Book_(cropped).jpg")
for *Punch's Pocket Book*\]\] The crinoline needed to be rigid enough to
support the skirts in their accustomed shape, but also flexible enough
to be temporarily pressed out of shape and spring back afterwards.[27]
Other materials used for crinolines included
[whalebone](whalebone "wikilink"),
[gutta-percha](gutta-percha "wikilink") and
[vulcanised](vulcanised "wikilink") [caoutchouc](caoutchouc "wikilink")
(natural rubber).[28] The idea of inflatable hoops was short-lived as
they were easily punctured, prone to collapse, and due to the use of
brimstone in the manufacture of rubber, they smelled unpleasant.[29]
Although hard rubber hoops of gutta-percha worked satisfactorily at
first, they were brittle and easily crushed without recovering their
form.[30] Despite objections that the sharp points of snapped steels
were hazardous,[31] lightweight steel was clearly the most successful
option.[32] It reduced the number of petticoats and their weight, and
offered increased freedom of movement of the legs.[33] However, hasty or
careless movements in a hoop skirt could lead to accidentally revealing
more than intended.[34] An advertisement published in *The Lady's
Newspaper* in 1863 for a cage crinoline with waved hoops attempted to
reassure the potential customer that while wearing it, activities such
as climbing stairs, passing to her theatre seat, dropping into armchairs
and leaning against furniture would be possible without hindrance either
to herself or to others around her.[35]

![](Crinoline_joke_photograph_sequence_04.jpg "fig:Crinoline_joke_photograph_sequence_04.jpg")
Despite some claims, such as that by the historian Max von Boehm, that
the largest crinolines measured up to ten yards (30 feet) around, the
photohistorian Alison Gernsheim concluded that the maximum realistic
circumference was in fact between five-and-a-half and six yards.[36]
Whilst a loosely gathered skirt draped over a large hoop would certainly
require a higher yardage, Gernsheim noted that ten yard hems were highly
improbable.[37] Staged photographs showing women wearing exaggeratedly
large crinolines were quite popular, such as a widely published sequence
of five [stereoscope](stereoscope "wikilink") views showing a woman
dressing with the assistance of several maids who require long poles to
lift her dress over her head and other ingenious means of navigating her
enormous hoopskirt.[38] Such photographs, which re-enacted contemporary
caricatures rather than accurately reflecting reality, were aimed
towards the [voyeur](voyeur "wikilink")'s market.[39][40] However, it
was a fact that the size of the crinoline often caused difficulties in
passing through doors, boarding carriages and generally moving about. By
the late 1860s many crinolines were of a significantly reduced size, as
noted by a [Victoria and Albert
Museum](Victoria_and_Albert_Museum "wikilink") curator observing the
sizes of cage crinolines in the Museum's collection.[41]

![](Crinolettes_1872-75.jpg "Crinolettes_1872-75.jpg")

### Crinolettes and 1880s revival

The crinoline began to fall out of fashion from about 1866. A modified
version, the **crinolette**, was a transitional garment bridging the gap
between the cage crinoline and the bustle. Fashionable from 1867 through
to the mid-1870s, the crinolette was typically composed of half-hoops,
sometimes with internal lacing or ties designed to allow adjustment of
fullness and shape.[42] The crinolette was still worn in the early
1880s, with an 1881 article describing it as sticking out solely behind,
as opposed to projecting "hideously at the side" like the crinoline.[43]
It is possible that some of the smaller crinolines that survive were
worn in combination with separate bustles, rather than in isolation.[44]
During the 1880s the cage crinoline was revived, with hoop petticoats
designed to accommodate the extremely large bustles of the period and
support the skirt hems.[45] One of the mid-1880s styles was called the
lobster pot due to its resemblance to a [lobster
trap](lobster_trap "wikilink").[46] Due to the extreme weight of the
fabrics of the decade, the hoops of the crinolines were crossed over
each other behind the legs in order to support and hold the skirts
firmly in place.[47] As with the earlier cage crinolines, sprung steel,
wire and cane were used.[48]

### Critical response

![](Maid_and_mistress_in_crinoline._Punch_Almanack_for_1862-2.png "fig:Maid_and_mistress_in_crinoline._Punch_Almanack_for_1862-2.png")
Unlike the [farthingales](farthingale "wikilink") and
[panniers](pannier_(clothing) "wikilink"), the crinoline was worn by
women of every social class; and the fashion swiftly became the subject
of intense scrutiny in Western media.[49][50] Critical articles on the
crinoline were published by the Hungarian journal *Az Üstökös* (1858)
and the Bulgarian journalist [Petko
Slaveykov](Petko_Slaveykov "wikilink") in 1864.[51] In the 1850s, the
Welsh poet [Dafydd Jones](Dafydd_Jones_(Dewi_Dywyll) "wikilink") wrote a
ballad decrying the fashion.[52][53] A similar sentiment was expressed
by a Russian song published in 1854, where the singer complains about
his wife having assumed the fashion.[54] In 1855, an observer of [Queen
Victoria](Queen_Victoria "wikilink")'s state visit to Paris complained
that despite the number of foreigners present, Western fashions such as
the crinoline had diluted national dress to such an extent that
everyone, whether Turkish, Scottish, Spanish or Tyrolean, dressed
alike.[55] Victoria herself is popularly said to have detested the
fashion, inspiring a song in *Punch* that started: "Long live our
gracious Queen/Who won't wear crinoline!"[56][57] Gernsheim has noted
that the Queen was often photographed in crinolines, and suggests that
this misunderstanding came from a request made by Victoria that female
guests attending her [daughter's
marriage](Victoria,_Princess_Royal#Marriage "wikilink") in 1858 should
leave their hoops off due to limited space in the Chapel Royal at [St
James's Palace](St_James's_Palace "wikilink").[58]

The crinoline was perceived as a signifier of social identity, with a
popular subject for cartoons being that of [maids](maid "wikilink")
wearing crinolines like their mistresses, much to the higher-class
ladies' disapproval.[59] The questions of servants in crinoline and the
related social concerns were raised by [George
Routledge](George_Routledge "wikilink") in an etiquette manual published
in 1875, where he criticised London housemaids for wearing hoops at
work.[60] As the girls knelt to scrub the doorsteps, Routledge described
how their hoops rose to expose their lower bodies, inspiring [street
harassment](street_harassment "wikilink") from [errand
boys](courier "wikilink") and other male passers-by.[61] Routledge
firmly opined that servants ought to save their fashionable garments for
their leisure periods, and dress appropriately for their work.[62]
However, this was challenged by some servants who saw attempts to
control their dress as equivalent to controlling their liberty, and
refused to work for employers who tried to forbid crinolines.[63]

![](SaraForbesBonetta.jpg "fig:SaraForbesBonetta.jpg") by [Camille
Silvy](Camille_Silvy "wikilink"), 1862\]\] [Arthur
Munby](Arthur_Munby "wikilink") observed that in the "barbarous
locality" of [Wigan](Wigan "wikilink"), the sight of a female
[colliery](colliery "wikilink") worker wearing trousers was "not half as
odd as a woman wearing a crinoline," exposing his own upper-class
attitudes.[64] In Australia, poorer rural women were photographed posing
outside their [slab huts](slab_hut "wikilink"), wearing their best
dresses with crinolines.[65] The French sociologist and economist
[Frédéric le Play](Pierre_Guillaume_Frédéric_le_Play "wikilink") carried
out surveys of French working-class families' wardrobes from 1850–75, in
which he found that two women had crinolines in their wardrobe, both
wives of skilled workers.[66] One, the fashion-conscious wife of a
glove-maker, owned two crinolines and eleven dresses, although her usual
everyday clothing consisted of [wooden shoes](sabot_(shoe) "wikilink")
and printed aprons.[67] In America, the mid-19th century crinoline has
become popularly associated with the image of the [Southern
Belle](Southern_belle "wikilink"), a young woman from the American Deep
South's upper socioeconomic, slave-owning classes.[68] However, as in
Europe and elsewhere, the crinoline was far from exclusively worn by
wealthy white women.[69] Both black and white women in America of all
classes and social standings wore hooped skirts, including First Lady
[Mary Todd Lincoln](Mary_Todd_Lincoln "wikilink") and her
African-American dressmaker, [Elizabeth
Keckley](Elizabeth_Keckley "wikilink"), who created many of Mrs.
Lincoln's own extravagant crinolines.[70][71]

The difficulties associated with the garment, such as its size, the
problems and hazards associated with wearing and moving about in it, and
the fact that it was worn so widely by women of all social classes, were
frequently exaggerated and parodied in satirical articles and
illustrations such as those in
*[Punch](Punch_magazine "wikilink")*.[72][73] Alexander Maxwell has
summarised crinoline mockery as expressing the male authors' insecurity
and fears that women, whose crinolines took up "enough space for five,"
would eventually "conquer" mankind.[74] Julia Thomas, observing the
extent of *Punch*'s anti-crinoline sentiment and mockery, noted that the
magazine's attacks, rather than crushing the fashion, exacerbated and
even invented the phenomenon of "crinolinemania."[75]

![](Women_wearing_crinolines_set_on_fire,_ca._1860,_lithograph_Wellcome_V0048935.jpg "Women_wearing_crinolines_set_on_fire,_ca._1860,_lithograph_Wellcome_V0048935.jpg")

#### Hazards

The flammability of the crinoline was widely reported. It is estimated
that, during the late 1850s and late 1860s in England, about 3,000 women
were killed in crinoline-related fires.[76] One such incident, the death
of a 14-year-old kitchenmaid called Margaret Davey was reported in *[The
Times](The_Times "wikilink")* on 13 February 1863. Her dress, "distended
by a crinoline," ignited as she stood on the fender of the
[fireplace](fireplace "wikilink") to reach some spoons on the
mantelpiece, and she died as a result of extensive burns. The
Deputy-Coroner, commenting that he was "astonished to think that the
mortality from such a fashion was not brought more conspicuously under
the notice of the Registrar-General," passed a verdict of "Accidental
death by fire, caused through crinoline."[77] A similar case was
reported later that year, when 16-year-old Emma Musson died after a
piece of burning [coke](coke_(fuel) "wikilink") rolled from the kitchen
fire to ignite her crinoline.[78] A month later, on 8 December 1863, [a
serious fire at the Church of the Company of
Jesus](Church_of_the_Company_Fire "wikilink") in
[Santiago](Santiago "wikilink"), Chile, killed between two and three
thousand people. The severity of the death toll is credited in part to
the large amounts of flammable fabric that made up the women's crinoline
dresses.[79] Two notable victims of crinoline fires were [William
Wilde](William_Wilde "wikilink")'s illegitimate daughters, Emily and
Mary, who died in November 1871 of burns sustained after their evening
dresses caught fire.[80][81] Slaveykov reported in 1864 that over the
last 14 years, at least 39,927 women worldwide had died in
crinoline-related fires, opining that it was more deadly than the
practice of [sati](Sati_(practice) "wikilink") or the
[auto-da-fé](auto-da-fé "wikilink").[82] Although flame-retardant
fabrics were available, these were thought unattractive and were
unpopular.[83]

Other risks associated with the crinoline were that it could get caught
in other people's feet, carriage wheels or furniture, or be caught by
sudden gusts of wind, blowing the wearer off her feet.[84] In 1859,
while participating in a [paper chase](Paper_Chase_(game) "wikilink"),
[Louisa, Duchess of
Manchester](Louisa_Cavendish,_Duchess_of_Devonshire "wikilink"), caught
her hoop while climbing over a [stile](stile "wikilink"), and was left
with the entirety of her crinoline and skirts thrown over her head,
revealing her scarlet [drawers](bloomers_(clothing) "wikilink") to the
assembled company.[85][86]

The crinoline was worn by some factory workers, leading to the textiles
firm [Courtaulds](Courtaulds "wikilink") instructing female employees in
1860 to leave their hoops and crinolines at home.[87] [Cecil Willett
Cunnington](Cecil_Willett_Cunnington "wikilink") described seeing a
photograph of female employees in the [Bryant and
May](Bryant_and_May "wikilink") match factories wearing crinolines while
at work.[88] A report in *[The Cork
Examiner](The_Cork_Examiner "wikilink")* of 2 June 1864 recorded the
death of Ann Rollinson from injuries sustained after her crinoline was
caught by a revolving machinery shaft in a [mangling
room](mangle_(machine) "wikilink") at Firwood bleach works.[89]

## 20th century

![](War_crinoline,_L'Art_et_la_Mode,_1916.jpg "fig:War_crinoline,_L'Art_et_la_Mode,_1916.jpg")
During [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink") the "war crinoline" became
fashionable from 1915–1917.[90] This style featured wide, full mid-calf
length skirts, and was described as practical (for enabling freedom of
walking and movement) and patriotic, as the sight of attractively
dressed women was expected to cheer up soldiers on leave.[91][92] The
full skirts of the war crinoline endured in the [robe de
style](robe_de_style "wikilink") of the 1920s.[93]

In the late 1930s, just before the outbreak of [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink"), there was a revival of the hooped
crinoline from designers such as [Edward
Molyneux](Edward_Molyneux "wikilink"), who put hoops in both day skirts
and evening gowns,[94] and [Norman
Hartnell](Norman_Hartnell "wikilink"), whose late 1930s
[Winterhalter](Franz_Xaver_Winterhalter "wikilink")-inspired crinoline
designs for [Queen
Elizabeth](Queen_Elizabeth_The_Queen_Mother "wikilink") were so
successful that the Queen is popularly (if inaccurately) credited with
having single-handedly brought crinolines back into fashion.[95][96]
Both as Queen, and as the Queen Mother, Elizabeth adopted the
traditional bell-shaped crinoline as her signature look for evening wear
and state occasions.[97] The film *[Gone With The
Wind](Gone_with_the_Wind_(film) "wikilink")*, released in 1939, inspired
the American fashion for prom dresses with crinolines in Spring
1940.[98]

![](Christian_Dior_evening_gown_called_"Zémire",_Fall-Winter_1954_01.jpg "fig:Christian_Dior_evening_gown_called_"Zémire",_Fall-Winter_1954_01.jpg"))\]\]
Following the Second World War, crinolines were once again revived by
designers such as [Christian Dior](Christian_Dior "wikilink"), whose
1947 "New Look" featured full skirts supported by stiffened
underskirts.[99][100] Loschek has suggested that, by explicitly
referencing the [Belle Époque](Belle_Époque "wikilink") era and reviving
historic styles of corsets and crinolines in his "New Look," Dior was
the first designer to introduce the idea of
[postmodernism](postmodernism "wikilink") to fashion, albeit
unconsciously.[101] Crinolines were popular throughout the 1950s and
into the early 1960s. The American designer [Anne
Fogarty](Anne_Fogarty "wikilink") was particularly noted for her
full-skirted designs worn over crinoline petticoats, which were always
separate garments from the dress to enable ease of movement and
travelling.[102] *[Life](Life_(magazine) "wikilink")* reported in 1953
on how one of Fogarty's crinoline designs from 1951 was almost exactly
duplicated by a design in Dior's latest collection.[103] Hooped, tiered
and/or ruffled crinoline petticoats in nylon, net and cotton were widely
worn, as were skirts with integrated hoops.[104][105]

![](Vivienne_Westwood_Mini_Crini.jpg "fig:Vivienne_Westwood_Mini_Crini.jpg")
In the mid-1980s [Vivienne Westwood](Vivienne_Westwood "wikilink")
revisited the crinoline, taking inspiration from the ballet
*[Petrushka](Petrushka_(ballet) "wikilink")* to produce
[miniskirt](miniskirt "wikilink") length versions that she christened
the "mini-crini."[106] The mini-crini silhouette influenced the work of
other designers such as [Christian
Lacroix](Christian_Lacroix "wikilink")'s "puffball" skirts.[107] The
Westwood mini-crini was described in 1989 as a combination of two
conflicting ideals – the crinoline, representing a "mythology of
restriction and encumbrance," and the miniskirt, representing an
"mythology of liberation."[108]

Late 20th and early 21st-century fashion designers such as [Alexander
McQueen](Alexander_McQueen "wikilink") and [John
Galliano](John_Galliano "wikilink") often used crinolines in their
designs, with the skirt of one of Galliano's ballgowns for Dior in 1998
reaching a width of 9 feet.[109] Galliano specifically visited the
original crinoline manufacturers that Christian Dior himself had used in
order to inform and influence his own designs.[110] McQueen was
fascinated by the crinoline and often referenced it in his collections,
cutting away leather ballgowns to reveal the cage beneath, or making it
out of silver-decorated cut metal.[111] One of McQueen's most notable
crinoline designs was modelled by the amputee model [Aimee
Mullins](Aimee_Mullins "wikilink") in a series of photographs by [Nick
Knight](Nick_Knight_(photographer) "wikilink") for *[Dazed and
Confused](Dazed "wikilink")*, in which Mullin's cage crinoline,
deliberately worn without overskirts in order to reveal her prosthetic
legs, was described as suggesting both a [walking
frame](Walker_(mobility) "wikilink") and a cage to "contain the
unruliness of the unwhole".[112][113] The images from this shoot were
declared among the most significant commercial images of 1998,
representing Knight and McQueen's dedication to presenting alternatives
to the traditional concepts of fashion and physical beauty.[114] After
McQueen's death in 2010, his successor, [Sarah
Burton](Sarah_Burton "wikilink"), continued the tradition of designing
crinolines for the McQueen brand.[115]

## 21st century

![](Western_Square_Dance_Group_(cropped).jpg "fig:Western_Square_Dance_Group_(cropped).jpg")
Crinolines continue to be worn well into the 21st century, typically as
part of formal outfits such as [evening gowns](evening_gown "wikilink"),
prom dresses, or [wedding dresses](wedding_dress "wikilink").[116] 1950s
and 1960s style net crinolines are a traditional element of costumes for
[square dancing](square_dance "wikilink") and
[clogging](clogging "wikilink").[117][118] They are also popular
garments for attending 1950s and 1960s influenced
[rockabilly](rockabilly "wikilink") events such as Viva Las Vegas.[119]
The [steampunk](steampunk "wikilink") movement has also appropriated
cage crinolines along with other elements of 19th century fashion such
as corsets and the [top hat](top_hat "wikilink") for its
costuming.[120][121]

![](The_bride_-_New_Orleans_crop.jpg "fig:The_bride_-_New_Orleans_crop.jpg")
In some contexts, the traditional hooped crinoline may be seen as
controversial, as in early 2015 when the [University of
Georgia](University_of_Georgia "wikilink") reportedly requested hoop
skirts not be worn to certain fraternity events due to their perceived
association with [Southern Belles](Southern_belle "wikilink") and the
slave-owning, upper socioeconomic classes of the American Deep
South.[122][123][124] The reason for the proposed ban was linked to the
[SAE racism
incident](2015_University_of_Oklahoma_Sigma_Alpha_Epsilon_racism_incident "wikilink")
earlier that year, with several articles noting it was a
well-intentioned attempt to avoid the University of Georgia fraternities
facing charges of racial insensitivity.[125][126][127] It was noted that
hoop skirts and crinolines had been worn by both black and white women
of all classes and social standings during the historical period in
question, and that despite popular associations, they were not exclusive
to the image of the Southern Belle.[128][129]

## References

## Bibliography

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

## Further reading

-

-

-

## External links

-

[Category:19th-century
fashion](Category:19th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century
fashion](Category:20th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
fashion](Category:21st-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Western
fashion)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Western_fashion) "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Lingerie](Category:Lingerie "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink") [Category:Woven
fabrics](Category:Woven_fabrics "wikilink")

[1] [Yarwood,
pp.125–127](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=UdP_sSKIxf0C&pg=PA125)

[2] [Martin & Koda,
p.119](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=2-Vwu3GmwtAC&pg=PA119)

[3] Steele, *Encyclopedia of clothing and fashion*, p.317

[4] [Flecker](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=YFfWji_tES8C&pg=PA146),
p.146.

[5] [Glotz](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=xgHnT3xNzvQC&pg=PA75),
p.75

[6] [Wace](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=QjyNAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA30),
p.30

[7] [Cleland, Davies &
Llewellyn-Jones](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=nTaCAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA125),
p.125

[8]

[9] [Watt](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=zplVikMZOXgC&pg=PA78),
p.78

[10] [Gernsheim](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=dg7DAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA44),
p.44

[11] Cunnington, p.89

[12]

[13] [Waugh](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=jgvICQAAQBAJ&pg=PT181),
p.181

[14] Cunnington, p.145

[15] [Cunnington &
Cunnington](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=PUXDAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA147),
p.147

[16]

[17] Cunnington, pp.165–169

[18]

[19] [Gernsheim](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=dg7DAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA45),
p.45

[20] [Breward,
pp.157–160](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=MpEwlPqTwnAC&pg=PA157)

[21]

[22]

[23] [D'Alleva](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=EFI7tr9XK6EC&pg=PA243),
p.243

[24] de Marly, p.76

[25] [Gernsheim](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=dg7DAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA46),
p.46

[26] [Wosk](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=bxcL8PmV_ZwC&pg=PA45),
p.45.

[27]

[28] [*Crinoline and
Whales*](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=KX5RAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA537),
Dublin University Magazine, pp.537–538

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35] *The Lady's Newspaper*, 1863, [cited by
Johnston](http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/c/corsets-and-crinolines-in-victorian-fashion/)

[36] [Gernsheim](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=dg7DAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA47),
p.47

[37] [Gernsheim](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=dg7DAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA48),
p.48

[38] Ginsburg, p.45

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42] [Johnston; *Crinolines, Crinolettes, Bustles and
Corsets*](http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/c/crinolines-crinolettes-bustles-corsets-1860-1880)

[43] Ewing, p.55-56."'The crinoline projected hideously at the side,
whereas the crinolette will only stick out at the back', commented *The
World* in July 1881"

[44] [Koda](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=rL-19_S0-PMC&pg=PA130),
pp.130–133.

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49] [Maxwell,
pp.16–18](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=r7dCBAAAQBAJ&pg=PA17&lpg=PA17)

[50] [Thomas](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=FhZBsN73AK8C&pg=PT91),
p.91.

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55] [Blau](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=YoAgKlO2dfgC&pg=PA154),
p.154

[56] [Gernsheim](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=dg7DAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA44),
p.44. NB: Gernsheim misquotes the rhyme as "God Save our gracious
Queen."

[57]

[58]

[59] [Barnard](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=QRKOAQAAQBAJ&pg=PA111),
p. 111

[60] [Routledge](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=oTE9AwAAQBAJ&pg=PT127),
p.127

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65] [Maynard](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=9IejqWWdxeoC&pg=PA111),
p.111

[66] [Crane](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=VT_r8GgEoKkC&pg=PA57),
p.57.

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77] .

[78] .

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87] [*Corsets and
Crinoline*](http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/c/corsets-and-crinolines-in-victorian-fashion/)

[88] Cunnington, p.207

[89]

[90] Waloschek, Morris & Seeling, p.60. "In 1915 \[...\] the war
crinoline was introduded \[...\] two years later it vanished."

[91] Steele (1988), pp.237–238.

[92] Milford-Cottam, p.59.

[93] Lehnert, p.17. "The war crinoline lived on in the form of the "robe
de style..."

[94]

[95] Cumming, p. 176

[96] Glynn, p. 117: "[Albert, Duke of York](George_VI "wikilink")
\[...\] indicated to Hartnell that a return to the crinoline dresses
shown in the Winterhalter portraits at the Palace would be in order..."

[97]

[98] [Hill](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=MvilOZhaRkAC&pg=PR58),
p.54

[99] [Blau](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=YoAgKlO2dfgC&pg=PA49),
p.49

[100] [Polan &
Tredre](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=mbI4UYThM4cC&pg=PA83), p.83

[101] [Loschek](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=uZN7HC67MBoC&pg=PA184),
p.184

[102] Milbank, p.188

[103]

[104] [Young &
Young](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=pt-o5xnJXvkC&pg=PA91), p.91.

[105] [Ewing](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=pX5r8p1dPjUC&pg=PA119),
pp.119–120

[106]

[107] [Evans](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=THRGcg6viZwC&pg=PA149&lpg=PA149),
in Breward, Ehrman & Evans, p.149

[108] Evans & Thornton, p.148-150

[109] [Koda](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=rL-19_S0-PMC&pg=PA125),
p.125

[110]

[111]

[112] [Loschek](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=uZN7HC67MBoC&pg=PA80),
p.80

[113] [Bancroft](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ePZinK8ANu8C&pg=PA48),
pp.48–51

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120] [Williams, Laing &
Frost](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=RchiAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA178), p.178

[121] Gleason &
Jeter,[p.45](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=WWVBAQAAQBAJ&pg=PA45#v=onepage&q&f=false);
[p.20](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=WWVBAQAAQBAJ&pg=PA20)

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]