![](Pedro_García_de_Benabarre_St_John_Retable_Detail.jpg "fig:Pedro_García_de_Benabarre_St_John_Retable_Detail.jpg")
![](Jeanne_grey.jpg "fig:Jeanne_grey.jpg"), 1545.\]\]
![](Elizabethditchley.jpg "fig:Elizabethditchley.jpg")

A **farthingale** is one of several structures used under Western
[European](Europe "wikilink") women's [clothing](clothing "wikilink") in
the 16th and 17th centuries to support the [skirts](skirt "wikilink") in
the desired shape. It originated in [Spain](Spain "wikilink").

## Spanish farthingale

The Spanish *verdugado*, from which "farthingale" derives, was a [hoop
skirt](hoop_skirt "wikilink") originally stiffened with the subtropical
[Giant Cane](Arundo_donax "wikilink"); later designs in the temperate
climate zone were stiffened with osiers ([willow
withies](withy "wikilink")), rope, or (from about 1580)
[whalebone](whalebone "wikilink"). The name *verdugado* comes from the
[Spanish](Spanish_language "wikilink") *verdugo*, ("green wood", or the
more modern meaning of "executioner").

The earliest sources indicate that [Joan of
Portugal](Joan_of_Portugal "wikilink") started to use verdugados with
hoops in Spain. Joan had provoked much criticism as she allegedly wore
dresses that displayed too much [décolletage](décolletage "wikilink"),
and her wanton behaviour was considered scandalous. When she started to
use farthingales, court fashion followed suit. As Joan had two
illegitimate children by Pedro de Castilla y Fonseca, rumors abounded
that she used the farthingale to cover up a pregnancy. The earliest
images of Spanish farthingales show hoops prominently displayed on the
outer surfaces of skirts, although later they merely provided shape to
the overskirt. [Catherine of Aragon](Catherine_of_Aragon "wikilink")
brought the fashion into England on her marriage to [Arthur, Prince of
Wales](Arthur,_Prince_of_Wales "wikilink"), in 1501.

Spanish farthingales were an essential element of Tudor fashion in
England, and remained a fixture of conservative Spanish court fashion
into the early 17th century (as exemplified by [Margaret of
Austria](Margaret_of_Austria,_Queen_of_Spain "wikilink")), before
evolving into the *guardainfante* of 17th-century Spanish dress.

## French farthingale

![](Ball_Henri_III_detail.jpg "fig:Ball_Henri_III_detail.jpg") The
French farthingale, also known as the wheel farthingale, originated in
court circles in France; it was introduced in the late 1520s to England.
It was introduced by Anne Boleyn after her return to England from the
French court. Randle Cotgrave, in his *Dictionarie of the French and
English Tongues* (1611), defined the French farthingale as “the kind of
roll used by such women as weare no Vardingales.” Several wardrobe
accounts and tailors' bills of the late 16th century give us an idea of
what these rolls were made of: they were stuffed with cotton and rags,
and stiffened with hoops of whalebone, wire or ropes made of bent reeds.
[Buckram](Buckram "wikilink") (stiff canvas) is the most commonly
mentioned material. Other references describe the rolls being
starched.[1]

Here are a couple of sample references to rolls from [Queen Elizabeth
I](Elizabeth_I_of_England "wikilink")'s Wardrobe Accounts (MS Egerton
2806):

:\* “\[for\] making of thre rolles of hollande clothe with wyers bounde
with reben (1585)

:\* making of a rolle of starched buckeram with whales bone (1586)

There are no extant examples of this style of undergarment, and only one
illustration, a satirical Dutch engraving of *c*1600, that shows the
bum-roll being affixed by a [tiring-woman](lady's_maid "wikilink").[2]
From contemporary references, and the visual cues provided by the
engraving, it appears to have consisted of a bolster-like roll either
stuffed or held out with reeds which, being fastened around the hips,
served the purpose of widening the skirts at the hip area, creating
drapes.

Some modern costumers conjecture that the French farthingale and the
"great farthingale" were one and the same garment, the difference in
shape and construction being due to changes in fashion from the 1580s to
the 1590s.

## Great farthingale

The **great farthingale** (a.k.a. the drum or wheel or cartwheel or
(rarely) Italian or Catherine-wheel farthingale in modern times) is the
style of farthingale that evolved from the French Farthingale discussed
above, and which became fashionable in the 1590s.

Although there are also no surviving examples of this type of garment,
there are a number of references to a "Great Farthingale" in Queen
Elizabeth I's wardrobe accounts during the time when this style was in
vogue. "Great" in this context referring to the large circumference of
the farthingale which was required in order to achieve the fashionable
silhouette.

The great farthingale appears to have been worn at an angle ("low before
and high behind") which visually elongated the wearer's torso while
shortening her legs. Modern costumers conjecture that it probably
consisted of one or more large hoops with horizontal stiffeners which
radiated from around the waist in order to produce a flat platter-like
shape when supported underneath by the "bumroll" or "French farthingale"
described above.

The great farthingale remained in fashion into the first few decades of
the 17th century, mostly for court functions, after which the fashion
died out.

## See also

-   [1500–1550 in fashion](1500–1550_in_fashion "wikilink")
-   [1550–1600 in fashion](1550–1600_in_fashion "wikilink")
-   [1600–1650 in fashion](1600–1650_in_fashion "wikilink")

## Notes

## References

-   [Anderson, Ruth Matilda](Anderson,_Ruth_Matilda "wikilink"):
    *Hispanic Costume 1480–1530*, The Hispanic Society of America, New
    York 1979.
-   [Arnold, Janet](Janet_Arnold "wikilink"): *Patterns of Fashion: the
    cut and construction of clothes for men and women 1560–1620*,
    Macmillan 1985. Revised edition 1986.
-   Arnold, Janet: *Queen Elizabeth's Wardrobe Unlock'd*, W S Maney and
    Son Ltd, Leeds 1988.

## External links

-   [Elizabethan Costuming, incl. information about
    farthingales](http://www.elizabethancostume.net/)

-

[Category:15th-century
fashion](Category:15th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:16th-century
fashion](Category:16th-century_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:17th-century
fashion](Category:17th-century_fashion "wikilink") [Category:History of
clothing (Europe)](Category:History_of_clothing_(Europe) "wikilink")
[Category:Spanish inventions](Category:Spanish_inventions "wikilink")
[Category:Undergarments](Category:Undergarments "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")

[1] [Queen Elizabeth's Wardrobe Accounts, MS Egerton 2806, lists the
materials used for rolls made by the royal farthingale
maker](http://www.elizabethancostume.net/qewu.html).

[2] [Illustration, from Harold Koda, *"Extreme Beauty: The Body
Transformed,* exhibition catalog (Metropolitan Museum of Art)
2001](http://jhisey.blogspot.com/2012/04/hoop-dreams.html).