![](Hihakama.JPG "fig:Hihakama.JPG")*wearing*hakama*\]\]
![](Bowing-students-waseda-graduation2015.ogv "fig:Bowing-students-waseda-graduation2015.ogv")
graduation ceremony, 2015\]\] are a type of traditional [Japanese
clothing](Japanese_clothing "wikilink"). Trousers were used by the
Chinese imperial court in the Sui and Tang dynasties, and this style was
adopted by the Japanese in the form of*hakama*beginning in the sixth
century.*Hakama'' are tied at the waist and fall approximately to the
ankles. They are worn over a [kimono](kimono "wikilink")
(hakamashita).[1]

There are two types of *hakama*, divided and undivided . The *umanori*
type have divided legs, similar to [trousers](trousers "wikilink"). Both
these types appear similar. A "mountain" or "field" type of umanori
*hakama* was traditionally worn by field or forest workers. They are
looser in the waist and narrower in the leg.

*Hakama* are secured by four straps (*himo*): two longer *himo* attached
on either side of the front of the garment, and two shorter *himo*
attached on either side of the rear. The rear of the garment has a rigid
trapezoidal section, called a . Below that on the inside is a
*hakama-dome* (袴止め) (a spoon-shaped component sometimes referred to
as a *hera*) which is tucked into the [obi](Obi_(sash) "wikilink") or
*himo* at the rear, and helps to keep the *hakama* in place.

*Hakama* have seven deep [pleats](pleats "wikilink"), two on the back
and five on the front. Although they appear balanced, the arrangement of
the front pleats (three to the right, two to the left) is asymmetrical,
and as such is an example of [asymmetry](asymmetry "wikilink") in
[Japanese aesthetics](Japanese_aesthetics "wikilink").

## Men's *hakama*

The most formal type of men's *hakama* are made of stiff, striped
[silk](silk "wikilink"), usually black and white, or black and navy
blue. These are worn with black *montsuki* kimono (kimono with one,
three, or five family [coats of arms](Mon_(emblem) "wikilink") on the
back, chest, and shoulders), white [tabi](tabi "wikilink") (divided-toe
socks), white [nagajuban](nagajuban "wikilink") (under-kimono) and
various types of footwear. In cooler weather, a *montsuki*
[haori](haori "wikilink") (long jacket) with a white *haori-himo*
(haori-fastener) completes the outfit.

*Hakama* can be worn with any type of kimono except
[yukata](yukata "wikilink") (light cotton summer kimono generally worn
for relaxing, for sleeping, or at festivals or summer outings). While
striped *hakama* are usually worn with formal kimono, stripes in colours
other than black, grey and white may be worn with less formal wear.
Solid and graduated colours are also common.

While *hakama* used to be a required part of men's wear, nowadays
typical Japanese men usually wear *hakama* only on extremely formal
occasions and at [tea ceremonies](Japanese_tea_ceremony "wikilink"),
weddings, and funerals. *Hakama* are also regularly worn by
practitioners of a variety of [martial arts](martial_arts "wikilink"),
such as [kendo](kendo "wikilink"), [iaido](iaido "wikilink"),
[taidō](taidō "wikilink"), [aikido](aikido "wikilink"),
[jōdō](jōdō "wikilink"), [ryū-te](ryū-te "wikilink"), and
[kyūdō](kyūdō "wikilink"). [Sumo](Sumo "wikilink") wrestlers, who do not
wear *hakama* in the context of their sport, are, however, required to
wear traditional Japanese dress whenever they appear in public. As
*hakama* are one of the most important parts of traditional male formal
dress, sumo wrestlers are often seen wearing *hakama* when attending
appropriately formal functions.

In addition to martial artists, *hakama* are also part of the everyday
wear of Shinto [kannushi](kannushi "wikilink"), priests who maintain and
perform services at [shrines](shrines "wikilink").

### Ooguchi-hakama, Uenobakama

Both are simultaneously worn with the courtly attire of *sokutai*
(束帯). The *ōguchi-hakama* (大口袴) are red under-pants, with closed
crotch, tied off on the wearer's left. The *uenobakama* (表袴), white
and with an open fly, is then worn over the *ooguchi-hakama*, tied off
on the right. These hakama designs can be traced to the [Nara
period](Nara_period "wikilink").

### Kamishimo: kataginu and naga-bakama

![](Kimono-hakama-p1000698.jpg "fig:Kimono-hakama-p1000698.jpg")
*Hakama* traditionally formed part of a complete outfit called a
*kamishimo* (上下 or 裃). Worn by samurai and courtiers during the [Edo
period](Edo_period "wikilink"), the outfit included a formal kimono,
hakama, and a sleeveless jacket with exaggerated shoulders called a
*kataginu*.

Samurai visiting the [shōgun](shōgun "wikilink") and other high-ranking
*[daimyōs](daimyō "wikilink")* at court were sometimes required to wear
very long hakama called *naga-bakama* (long hakama). These resemble
normal hakama in every way except their remarkable length in both the
back *and* front, forming a train one or two feet long and impeding the
ability to walk normally, thus helping to prevent a surprise attack or
assassination attempt (see image
[here](http://www.iz2.or.jp/english/fukusyoku/kosode/9.htm)).
*Naga-bakama* are now only worn particularly in [noh](noh "wikilink")
plays (including [kyōgen](kyōgen "wikilink")), Kabuki plays and
[Shinto](Shinto "wikilink") rituals.

### Karusan-bakama

Some hakama during the [Sengoku period](Sengoku_period "wikilink") had
the hems made narrower than the body in imitation of the ballooning
trousers worn by the Portuguese. This style carried on into the Edo
period and became called karusan-bakama. In addition to the taper, they
had a secured band of cloth—looking rather like a pants cuff—sewn around
each leg’s hem, so the ballooning fabric would not open out like regular
hakama. Also commonly known as tattsuke-hakama.

### Sashinuki hakama

![](Temple_Shinto_Meiji-jingū_à_Tokyo_J_(1).jpg "fig:Temple_Shinto_Meiji-jingū_à_Tokyo_J_(1).jpg")
Sashinuki are a type of hakama that are meant to be worn blousing over
the leg and exposing the foot. To accomplish this, they are somewhat
longer than normal hakama, and a cord is run through the hem and drawn
tight, creating a "ballooning" effect. To allow for the body required,
more formal sashinuki were six-panel hakama rather than four panels.
Technically, this cord around the ankle makes sashinuki a type of
kukuri- (tied) hakama. The earliest form of sashinuki were cut like
normal hakama (albeit a bit longer) and have a cord running through the
hem of each leg. These cords were pulled tight and tied off at the
ankle. This was the form commonly worn during the Heian period.
Sashinuki were worn by court nobles with various types of leisure or
semi-formal wear.

### Yoroi hakama

![](Kikko_ko-bakama.jpg "fig:Kikko_ko-bakama.jpg") Yoroi hakama (armored
trousers) had small armor plates or mail armor sewn to the cloth of the
hakama. They were worn by samurai warriors.

## Women's hakama

![](Mariko's_Graduation_'96.jpg "fig:Mariko's_Graduation_'96.jpg")
Women's hakama differ from men's in a variety of ways, most notably
fabric design and method of tying.

While men's hakama can be worn on both formal and informal occasions,
women rarely wear hakama, except at graduation ceremonies and for
traditional Japanese sports such as [kyūdō](kyūdō "wikilink"), some
branches of [aikido](aikido "wikilink") and
[kendo](kendo "wikilink").[2] Women do not wear hakama at tea ceremony.
The image of women in kimono and hakama are culturally associated with
school teachers. Just as university professors in Western countries don
their academic caps and gowns when their students graduate, many female
school teachers in Japan attend annual graduation ceremonies in
traditional kimono with hakama.

The most iconic image of women in hakama is the [miko](miko "wikilink")
or shrine maidens who assist in maintenance and ceremonies. A miko's
uniform consists of a plain white kimono with a bright red hakama,
sometimes a red naga-bakama during formal ceremonies.[3]

While formal men's hakama are made of striped fabric, women's formal
hakama are either a solid color or dyed with graduating hues. Hakama for
young women are sometimes sparsely decorated with embroidered flowers
like [sakura](sakura "wikilink"). Women typically wear hakama just below
the bust line, while men wear them at the waist.

## Tying hakama

There are many ways for men to tie hakama. First, the obi is tied in a
special knot (an "under-hakama knot") at the rear. Starting with the
front, the ties are brought around the waist and crossed over the top of
the knot of the obi. The ties are brought to the front and crossed below
the waist, then tied at the back, under the knot of the obi. The
hakama-dome is then tucked behind the obi, the koshi-ita is adjusted,
and the rear ties brought to the front and tied in a variety of ways.
The most formal method results in a knot that resembles two bow-ties in
a cross shape.

The method of tying the ties is also different, with women's hakama
being tied in a simpler knot or a bow. As with men's hakama, the front
ties are first brought to the back, then to the front, then tied at the
back in a knot. Then the back himo are brought around to the front. At
this point, they may be tied with a bow at the left hip, just in front
of the opening, with the ends of the ties at equal lengths. For more
secure fastening, the ties may be wrapped once at center front, then
tied inside at the back.

## Folding hakama

![](Hakama,_folded.jpeg "fig:Hakama,_folded.jpeg") Like all types of
traditional Japanese clothing, it is important to fold and store hakama
correctly to prevent damage and prolong the life of the garment,
especially those that are made of silk. With hakama this is particularly
important, since hakama have so many pleats which can easily lose their
creases; re-creasing the pleats may require specialist attention in
extreme cases.

Hakama are often considered particularly challenging to learn to fold
properly, in part because of their pleats and in part because their long
ties must be correctly smoothed and gathered before being tied in
specific patterns.

Various martial arts traditions in which practitioners wear them have
prescribed methods of folding the hakama. This is often considered an
important part of [etiquette](etiquette "wikilink").

In some martial arts it is also an old tradition that the highest
ranking student has the responsibility to fold the teacher's hakama as a
token of respect.[4][5]

## References

## Further reading

-   [How to fold the
    Hakama](http://www.scnf.org/Uniform/Hakama/index.html), Southern
    California Naginata Federation.
-   [How to tie a
    Hakama](https://web.archive.org/web/20070628182516/https://bujindesign.com/info/hakama_tying.pdf),
    Bu Jin Design Corporation.
-   [How to wash a
    Hakama](http://www.kendo-usa.org/reference/hakama_wash.htm), Kendo
    America. chinaman

[Category:Japanese clothing](Category:Japanese_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Keikogi](Category:Keikogi "wikilink") [Category:Shinto
religious clothing](Category:Shinto_religious_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink") [Category:History of Asian
clothing](Category:History_of_Asian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Samurai clothing](Category:Samurai_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Articles containing video
clips](Category:Articles_containing_video_clips "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]