A **longyi** (; ) is a sheet of [cloth](cloth "wikilink") widely worn in
[Burma](Burma "wikilink"). It is approximately long and wide. The cloth
is often sewn into a cylindrical shape. It is worn around the waist,
running to the feet. It is held in place by folding fabric over without
a knot. It is sometimes folded up to the knee for comfort. Similar
garments are found in [India](India "wikilink"),
[Bangladesh](Bangladesh "wikilink"), [Sri Lanka](Sri_Lanka "wikilink"),
and the [Malay Archipelago](Malay_Archipelago "wikilink"). In the
[Indian subcontinent](Indian_subcontinent "wikilink") it is known
variously as a *[lungi](lungi "wikilink")*, *longi*, *kaili* or
*[saaram](sarong "wikilink")*.

## History

![](Burmese_man.jpg "fig:Burmese_man.jpg")
![](Bodleian_Ms._Burm._a._5_fol82-3.jpg "fig:Bodleian_Ms._Burm._a._5_fol82-3.jpg")
![](Burman_lady.jpg "fig:Burman_lady.jpg") The modern *longyi*, a single
piece of cylindrical cloth, is a relatively recent introduction to
Burma, having gained popularity during British [colonial
rule](colonial_rule "wikilink"), effectively replacing the
***paso***and***htamein*** of precolonial times.[1] The word *longyi*
formerly referred to the [sarong](sarong "wikilink") worn by
[Malay](Ethnic_Malays "wikilink") men.[2]

In precolonial times, men's pasos used to be a long piece of called
*taungshay paso* () and unsewn. Alternately the *htamein* was a long
piece of cloth open at the front to reveal the calves, with a dark strip
of cotton or velvet sewn on the upper edge, a patterned sheet of cloth
in the middle and a strip of red or white cloth sewn below, trailing on
the bottom like a short [train](Train_(clothing) "wikilink").[3][4] Paso
was commonly worn by men in 19th century Burma and Thailand.[5][6] The
amount of cloth in the putso was a sign of social status.[7]

A western visitor to [Rangoon](Rangoon "wikilink") in the 19th century
wrote:

Visiting [Amarapura](Amarapura "wikilink"), [Henry
Yule](Henry_Yule "wikilink") described the pasos and their equivalent
for women, the htameins, as "the most important article of local
production", employing a large proportion of the local population. The
silk was imported from China.[8] He wrote:

However, with the onset of colonial rule, [Lower
Burma](Lower_Burma "wikilink") and urban areas more readily adopted the
*longyi* worn in the Malay and Indian style, which was considered more
convenient to wear.[9][10]

## Design and style

![](Burmese_SPDC_members_greet_Abhisit_Vejjajiva.jpg "fig:Burmese_SPDC_members_greet_Abhisit_Vejjajiva.jpg")
members greeted Thai PM Abhisit Vejjajiva in *acheik* patterned longyi
typically worn by women. Various sources attributed this to
*[yadaya](yadaya "wikilink")* practices.[11][12]\]\] In Burma, longyis
worn by males are called *paso* (), while those worn by females are
called *htamein* (, or *htamain*). Strictly speaking, they are not
unisex attire, as the way they are worn as well as the patterns and
makeup are different between the sexes.

Men wear the modern paso by making a fold on either side in front and
tied by tucking them together at the waist just below the navel. Women,
on the other hand, always have a 3 cubit 1 finger span length but again
unsewn in the old days like men's. They are worn wrapped around with a
single broad fold in front and the end tucked in on one side or folding
back at the hip and tucking into the opposite side of the waist, usually
topped with a fitted blouse worn just to the waistband.

Hemlines rise and fall as the fashion of the day dictates although they
are unlikely to go up above the knee. Longyis are generally sold unsewn
but nowadays they are available ready to wear; htameins may even be sewn
like Western skirts. Untying and re-tying a longyi is often seen in
public with both sexes, women much more discreetly than men.

## Patterns and fabrics

![](Acheik_htamains.jpg "fig:Acheik_htamains.jpg") Men's pasos are
generally stripes or checks apart from plain colours and may be worn
upside down or inside out with no difference. Women's htamein has a
black calico band called *a htet sint* (, lit. topband) for the waist;
they wear more multicoloured and floral patterns, too.

Cotton is the basic material but all sorts of fabrics, both imported and
home-grown, may be made into longyis.[13] Tootal, georgette, satin and
crepe have been made into htameins. [Indonesian](Indonesia "wikilink")
[batik](batik "wikilink"), although very expensive, has been very
popular for decades; outfits of batik () of the same design top and
bottom were very popular in the 1980s.

For ceremonial and special occasions wearers use their best silks; the
most elaborate ones are known as *a cheik* (, lit. hook), a beautiful
and intricate wave or [houndstooth](houndstooth "wikilink") pattern in
several colour combinations from the weavers of
[Amarapura](Amarapura "wikilink"). They are worn especially at weddings,
almost invariably by the bride and groom in matching colours.[14] The
poor may keep aside some traditional silks for special occasions.

In ancient times silks were generally worn by royalty and courtiers, the
royal pasos and htameins richly embroidered with gold, silver, pearls
and precious stones. Modern reproductions of these may be seen on the
stage at *zat pwè*s (theatrical performances).

Ethnic and regional weaves and patterns are plenty and popular. There
are [Rakhine](Rakhine_people "wikilink") longyi,
[Mon](Mon_people "wikilink") longyi, [Kachin](Kachin_people "wikilink")
longyi, [Inle](Inle_lake "wikilink") longyi, Zin Mè ([Chiang
Mai](Chiang_Mai "wikilink")) longyi, Yaw longyi, Seik Hkun longyi,
[Dawei](Dawei "wikilink") longyi and more.[15][16][17]

Silk pasos, but not *a cheik*, that men wear for special occasions are
called *bangauk* ([Bangkok](Bangkok "wikilink")) paso. *Kala* (Indian)
paso are often longer and are worn by taller people; *Kaka zin* refers
to a broad check pattern of black, brown and white worn by Indian
teashop owners. [Mercerised](Mercerization "wikilink") longyis from
India are popular as the fabric is more durable.

## Versatility and convenience

![](Chinlon_hkadaung_kyaik.JPG "fig:Chinlon_hkadaung_kyaik.JPG") in a
[Yangon](Yangon "wikilink") neighbourhood\]\] The longyi suits the
climate as it allows some air to circulate and keeps cool in the hot
sun. Silks are unique in keeping warm in the winter as well as cool in
the summer.

The longyi is versatile. Men often tuck the lower portions of their
pasos at the top by bunching it in the front then passing it up between
the legs round the back to the waist, known as *paso hkadaung kyaik*
and, rather like the [dhoti](dhoti "wikilink"), usually for climbing and
sporting activities instead of changing into shorts or trousers.[18]
Soldiers in ancient times wore their pasos in this manner either on
their own or on top of a pair of trousers.

In rural areas men are often seen with a folded paso on one shoulder
either for use when bathing (*yei lè* — lit. water change — longyi) or
for use as a cushion for a carrying pole on the shoulder or a heavy load
on the back. Women, when they bathe, simply wear their htamein higher by
tucking it just under the arms to cover their breasts before removing
the blouse; they may be seen using the htamein as a buoy in the river by
trapping some air in and secured underneath by the hands. They use a
man's paso or another piece of long fabric, rolled and coiled as a
cushion on top of their heads to carry water pots, firewood, baskets and
trays; it is the street hawker's customary way of carrying her wares.

Changing is done simply by stepping into the new longyi and pulling it
up, at the same time loosening and dropping the old one, or the new one
can be pulled over from the head down. However, even when in private,
women change without removing all their clothes. Instead, they will wear
one htaimin while changing into a new one. A woman may be seen pulling
her htamein up bit by bit as she wades deeper and deeper into a river
without getting it wet. It is merely a matter of lifting it up in the
bathroom or in bed for that matter. Washing and ironing cannot be
simpler as they are cylindrical pieces of cloth, easily hung, pressed,
folded and stacked with a bare minimum use of wardrobe space.

<File:Longyi> sellers at Mandalay.JPG\|Longyis for sale, Mahamuni,
Mandalay Image:Paso hkadaung kyaik, Ngahtatgyi Buddha, Yangon.JPG\|A
statue wearing a *paso hkadaung kyaik* Image:Kachin
longyi.JPG\|[Kachin](Kachin_people "wikilink") longyi with tartan design

## See also

-   [Sarong](Sarong "wikilink")
-   [Sampot](Sampot "wikilink")
-   [Lungi](Lungi "wikilink")

## References

14.Amitav Ghosh (2002) *The Glass Palace* pp 25,

## External links

-   [Myanmar Fashion from Myanmar Image
    Gallery](http://www.myanmar-image.com/newmenu/costume/)
-   [Burma Silks inc.
    video](https://web.archive.org/web/20050313214818/http://www.mrtv3.net.mm/pages/100shul.html)

[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink") [Category:Burmese
clothing](Category:Burmese_clothing "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]