Outside Western cultures, men's [clothing](clothing "wikilink") commonly
includes [skirts](skirt "wikilink") and skirt-like garments; however, in
North America and much of Europe, the wearing of a skirt is today
usually seen as typical for women and girls and not men and boys, the
most notable exceptions being the [cassock](cassock "wikilink") and the
[kilt](kilt "wikilink"). People have variously attempted to promote the
wearing of skirts by men in Western culture and to do away with this
[gender distinction](gender_roles "wikilink"), albeit with limited
general success[1] and considerable cultural resistance.[2]

## In Western cultures

### Ancient times

Skirts have been worn since prehistoric times. They were the standard
dressing for men and women in all ancient cultures in the [Near
East](Near_East "wikilink") and [Egypt](Egypt "wikilink").

The Kingdom of [Sumer](Sumer "wikilink") in
[Mesopotamia](Mesopotamia "wikilink") whose greatest achievement was the
invention of writing recorded two categories of clothing. The ritual
attire for men was a fur skirt tied to a belt called
[Kaunakes](Kaunakes "wikilink"). The term kaunakes, which originally
referred to a sheep's fleece was later applied to the garment itself.
The animal pelts originally used were replaced by kaunakes cloth, a
textile that imitated fleecy sheep skin.[3] Kaunakes cloth also served
as a symbol in religious iconography, as the fleecy cloak of [St. John
the Baptist](St._John_the_Baptist "wikilink").[4][5]

Depictions of kings and their attendants from the [Old Assyrian
Empire](Old_Assyrian_Empire "wikilink") and
[Babylonia](Babylonia "wikilink") on monuments like the Black Obelisk of
Salmanazar show men wearing fringed cloths wrapped around their sleeved
tunics.[6]

[Ancient Egyptian](Ancient_Egypt "wikilink") garments were mainly made
of white linen.[7] The exclusive use of draped linen garments and the
wearing of similar styles by men and women remained almost unaltered as
the main features of Ancient Egyptian costume. From about 2130 BC during
the [Old Kingdom of Egypt](Old_Kingdom_of_Egypt "wikilink"), men also
wore wrap around skirts (kilts) known as the
[shendyt](shendyt "wikilink"), They were made of a rectangular piece of
cloth wrapped around the lower body and tied in front. By the [Middle
Kingdom of Egypt](Middle_Kingdom_of_Egypt "wikilink") there was a
fashion for longer kilts, almost like skirts, reaching from the waist to
ankles, sometimes hanging from the armpits. During the [New Kingdom of
Egypt](New_Kingdom_of_Egypt "wikilink") kilts with a pleated triangular
section became fashionable for men.[8] Beneath was worn a triangular
[loincloth](loincloth "wikilink"), or shente, whose ends were fastened
with cord ties.[9]

In [Ancient Greece](Ancient_Greece "wikilink") the simple, sleeved
T-shaped tunics were constructed of three seamed tubes of cloth, a style
that originated in the Semitic Near East, along with the
[Semitic](Semitic_languages "wikilink")-based word khiton, also referred
to as a [chiton](Chiton_(costume) "wikilink").[10] The belted worn linen
chiton was the primary garment for men and women.[11]

<File:Egyptian> kilt.jpg\|Statue of Ramaat, an official from Gizeh
wearing a pleated Egyptian kilt, ca. 2.250 BC <File:A> Griechen
Wagenlenker 02.jpg\|A Greek charioteer from Delphi wearing a long
chiton, ca. 470 BC Image:Luttrell servant.jpg\|An illustration from
between 1325-1335 showing an English man in a skirted garment
<File:Gotik> MaennerrockFarbe.jpg\|Men's dress made of red silk
(1480–90) to be buttoned on the front, History Museum of Bern
(Switzerland) <File:Ulrich3mecklenburg.jpg%7CDuke> Ulrich of Mecklenburg
wearing a doublet and diverted skirt with
[codpiece](codpiece "wikilink") and black tights, (1573) <File:Workshop>
of Hans Holbein the Younger - Portrait of Henry VIII - Google Art
Project.jpg\|[Henry VIII](Henry_VIII "wikilink") wearing a doublet and
diverted skirt with codpiece

The [Romans](Ancient_Rome "wikilink") adopted many facets of Greek
culture including the same manner of dressing. The
[Celts](Celts "wikilink") and [Germanic
peoples](Germanic_peoples "wikilink") wore a skirted garment which the
historian [Diodorus Siculus](Diodorus_Siculus "wikilink") (fl. 1st
century BC) called [chiton](chiton "wikilink"). Below they wore
knee-length trousers. The [Anglo-Saxons](Anglo-Saxons "wikilink"),
[Normans](Normans "wikilink"), [Franks](Franks "wikilink") and other
people of Western and Northern Europe continued this fashion well into
the [Middle Ages](Middle_Ages "wikilink"), as can be seen in the [Bayeux
Tapestry](Bayeux_Tapestry "wikilink").[12]

![](1000-1100,_Norman._-_033_-_Costumes_of_All_Nations_(1882).JPG "1000-1100,_Norman._-_033_-_Costumes_of_All_Nations_(1882).JPG")

Technological advances in weaving with foot-treadle floor
[looms](loom "wikilink") and the use of [scissors](scissors "wikilink")
with pivoted blades and handles in the 13–15th century led to new
designs. The upper part of dresses could now be tailored exactly to the
body. Men's dresses were buttoned on the front and women's dresses got a
[décolletage](décolletage "wikilink"). The lower part of men's dresses
were much shorter in length than those for women. They were wide cut and
often pleated with an A-line so that horse riding became more
comfortable. Even a [knights](knights "wikilink") armor had a short
metal skirt below the breastplate. It covered the straps attaching the
upper legs iron cuisse to the breastplate.[13][14]

### Decline

The innovative new techniques specially improved tailoring trousers and
tights which designs needed more differently cut pieces of cloth than
most skirts. "Real" trousers and tights increasingly replaced the
prevalent use of the [hose (clothing)](hose_(clothing) "wikilink") which
like stockings covered only the legs and had to be attached with garters
to underpants or a [doublet](doublet_(clothing) "wikilink").[15] A
skirt-like garment to cover the crotch and bottom was no more necessary.
In an intermediate stage to openly wearing trousers the upper classes
favoured voluminous pantskirts and diverted skirts like the padded
[hose](hose_(clothing) "wikilink") or the latter [petticoat
breeches](petticoat_breeches "wikilink").[16]

Though during most of history, men and specially dominant men have been
colourful in pants and skirts like Hindu
[maharajas](maharajas "wikilink") decked out in silks and diamonds or
the high heeled [King Louis XIV](King_Louis_XIV "wikilink") of France
with a diverted skirt, stockings and long wig.[17] The [French
Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink") and the [Industrial
Revolution](Industrial_Revolution "wikilink") changed the dress code for
men and women not only in France. From the early [Victorian
era](Victorian_era "wikilink"), there was a decline in the wearing of
bright colours and luxurious fabrics by men, with a definite preference
for sobriety of dress.[18][19][20] This phenomenon the English
psychologist [John Flügel](John_Flügel "wikilink") termed "The Great
Masculine Renunciation".[21] Skirts were effeminized. *"Henceforth
trousers became the ultimate clothing for men to wear, while women had
their essential frivolity forced on them by the dresses and skirts they
were expected to wear"*.[22] By the mid-20th century, orthodox Western
male dress, especially business and semi-formal dress, was dominated by
sober suits, plain shirts and ties. The connotation of trousers as
exclusively male has been lifted by the power of the [feminist
movement](feminist_movement "wikilink") while the connotation of skirts
as female is largely still existing leaving the Scottish
[kilt](kilt "wikilink") and the Albanian and Greek
[fustanella](fustanella "wikilink") as the only traditional men's skirts
of Europe.

### Revival

In the 1960s, there was widespread reaction against the accepted North
American and European conventions of male and female dress. This
[unisex](unisex "wikilink") fashion movement aimed to eliminate the
sartorial differences between men and women. In practice, it usually
meant that women would wear male dress, i.e., shirts and trousers. Men
rarely went as far in the adoption of traditionally female dress modes.
The furthest that most men went in the 1960s in this regard were velvet
trousers, flowered or frilled shirts and ties, and long hair.[23]

In the 1970s, David Hall, a former research engineer at the Stanford
Research Institute (SRI), actively promoted the use of skirts for men,
appearing on both *[The Tonight Show Starring Johnny
Carson](The_Tonight_Show_Starring_Johnny_Carson "wikilink")* and the
*[Phil Donahue Show](Phil_Donahue_Show "wikilink")*. In addition, he was
featured in many articles at the time.[24] In his essay "Skirts for Men:
the advantages and disadvantages of various forms of bodily covering",
he opined that men should wear skirts for both symbolic and practical
reasons. Symbolically, wearing skirts would allow men to take on
desirable female characteristics. In practical terms, skirts, he
suggested, do not chafe around the groin, and they are more suited to
warm climates.

In 1985 the French [fashion designer](fashion_designer "wikilink")
[Jean-Paul Gaultier](Jean-Paul_Gaultier "wikilink") created his first
skirt for a men. Transgressing social codes Gaultier frequently
introduces the skirt into his men's wear collections as a means of
injecting novelty into male attire, most famously the sarong seen on
[David Beckham](David_Beckham "wikilink").[25] Other famous designers
such as [Vivienne Westwood](Vivienne_Westwood "wikilink"), [Giorgio
Armani](Giorgio_Armani "wikilink"), [John
Galliano](John_Galliano "wikilink"), [Kenzo](Kenzo_Takada "wikilink"),
[Rei Kawakubo](Rei_Kawakubo "wikilink") and [Yohji
Yamamoto](Yohji_Yamamoto "wikilink") also created men's skirts.[26] In
the US [Marc Jacobs](Marc_Jacobs "wikilink") became the most prominent
supporter of the skirt for men. The Milan men's fashion shows and the
New York fashion shows frequently show skirts for men. [Jonathan
Davis](Jonathan_Davis "wikilink"), the lead singer of
[Korn](Korn "wikilink"), has been known to wear kilts at live shows and
in music videos throughout his 18-year career with that band. [Mick
Jagger](Mick_Jagger "wikilink") from the [Rolling
Stones](Rolling_Stones "wikilink") and [Anthony
Kiedis](Anthony_Kiedis "wikilink") from the [Red Hot Chili
Peppers](Red_Hot_Chili_Peppers "wikilink") were photographed wearing
dresses by [Anton Corbijn](Anton_Corbijn "wikilink").[27] For an
[FCKH8](FCKH8 "wikilink") anti-discrimination campaign [Iggy
Pop](Iggy_Pop "wikilink") was seen wearing a black dress and handbag.
[Guns N' Roses](Guns_N'_Roses "wikilink")' singer, [Axl
Rose](Axl_Rose "wikilink"), was known to wear men's skirts during the
[Use Your Illusion](Use_Your_Illusion_Tour "wikilink") period. [Robbie
Williams](Robbie_Williams "wikilink") and [Martin
Gore](Martin_Gore "wikilink") from [Depeche
Mode](Depeche_Mode "wikilink") also performed on stage in skirts. During
his Berlin time (1984–1985) Martin Gore was often seen in public wearing
skirts. In an interview with the Pop Special Magazin (7/1985) he said:
"Sexual barriers and gender roles are old fashioned and out. \[...\] I
and my girlfriend often share our clothes and Make-up". Brand Nubian
[Lord Jamar](Lord_Jamar "wikilink") criticized [Kanye
West](Kanye_West "wikilink") wearing skirts, saying that his style has
no place in hip-hop.[28][29]

In 2008 in France, an association was created to help spur the revival
of the skirt for men.[30] Hot weather has also encouraged use. In June
2013, Swedish train drivers won the right to wear skirts in the summer
when their cabins can reach ,[31] whilst in July 2013, parents supported
boys wearing skirts at [Gowerton Comprehensive
School](Gowerton_Comprehensive_School "wikilink") in
[Wales](Wales "wikilink").[32]

America is also not without its own contemporary advocates of skirts as
menswear. One male blogger "denies that skirts are exclusively feminine
garments" and suggests that the prevailing societal view reflects a
"symbology of power" that persisted even in wake of the [women's
liberation movement](women's_liberation_movement "wikilink").[33] He
suggests an apparent causality paradox in the perception of skirts as
exclusively womenswear: "are skirts perceived as feminine because women
wear them or do women wear them because skirts are perceived as
feminine?"[34] Though lamenting the lack skirts designed specifically
for men, he discusses in detail how to "advance a viewpoint of masculine
aesthetics" in his how-to guide for men.[35] Other internet denizens
echo these sentiments (with varying degrees of anonymity) in the "Skirt
Cafe" internet forum "dedicated to exploring, promoting and advocating
skirts and kilts as a fashion choice for men."[36] However, the forum's
moderators conspicuously assert that "this is NOT a transvestite or
crossdresser forum. We are committed to a fundamentally masculine gender
identity."[37]

### Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibition

In 2003, the [Metropolitan Museum of
Art](Metropolitan_Museum_of_Art "wikilink") displayed an exhibition,
organized by [Andrew Bolton](Andrew_Bolton_(curator) "wikilink") and
[Harold Koda](Harold_Koda "wikilink") of the Museum's Costume Institute
and sponsored by [Gaultier](Jean-Paul_Gaultier "wikilink"), entitled
*Bravehearts: Men in Skirts*.[38] The idea of the exhibition was to
explore how various groups and individuals (from
[hippies](hippie "wikilink") through pop stars to fashion designers)
have promoted the idea of men wearing skirts as "the future of
menswear". It displayed men's skirts on mannequins, as if in the window
of a department store, in several historical and cross-cultural
contexts.[39]

The exhibition display pointed out the lack of a "natural link" between
an item of clothing and the masculinity or femininity of the wearer,
mentioning the [kilt](kilt "wikilink") as "one of the most potent,
versatile, and enduring skirt forms often looked upon by fashion
designers as a symbol of a natural, uninhibited, masculinity". It
pointed out that fashion designers and male skirt-wearers employ the
wearing of skirts for three purposes: to transgress conventional moral
and social codes, to redefine the ideal of masculinity, and to inject
novelty into male fashion. It linked the wearing of men's skirts to
youth movements and [countercultural
movements](counterculture "wikilink") such as
[punk](Punk_rock "wikilink"), [grunge](grunge "wikilink"), and [glam
rock](glam_rock "wikilink") and to pop-music icons such as [Boy
George](Boy_George "wikilink"), [Miyavi](Miyavi "wikilink") and [Adrian
Young](Adrian_Young "wikilink").[40] Many male musicians have worn
skirts and kilts both on and off stage. The wearing of skirts by men is
also found in the [goth subculture](goth_subculture "wikilink").

Elizabeth Ellsworth, a professor of [media
studies](media_studies "wikilink"),[41] eavesdropped on several visitors
to the exhibition, noting that because of the exhibition's placement in
a self-contained space accessed by a staircase at the far end of the
museum's first floor, the visitors were primarily self-selected as those
who would be intrigued enough by such an idea in the first place to
actually seek it out. According to her report, the reactions were
wide-ranging, from the number of women who teased their male companions
about whether they would ever consider wearing skirts (to which several
men responded that they would) to the man who said, "A caftan after a
shower or in the gym? Can you imagine? 'Excuse me! Coming through!'". An
adolescent girl rejected in disgust the notion that skirts were similar
to the wide pants worn by [hip-hop](hip-hop "wikilink") artists. Two
elderly women called the idea "utterly ridiculous". One man, reading the
exhibition's presentation on the subject of male skirt-wearing in
cultures other than those in North America and Europe, observed, "God!
Three quarters of the world's population \[wear skirts\]!"[42]

The exhibition itself attempted to provoke visitors into considering
how, historically, male-dress codes have come to this point and whether
in fact a trend towards the wearing of skirts by men in the future
actually exists. It attempted to raise challenging questions of how a
simple item of dress connotes (in Ellsworth's words) "huge ramifications
in meanings, behaviours, everyday life, senses of self and others, and
configurations of insider and outsider".[43]

### Contemporary styles

The wearing of skirts, kilts, or similar garments on an everyday basis
by men in Western cultures is an extremely small minority. One
manufacturer of contemporary kilt styles claims to sell over 12,000 such
garments annually,[44] resulting in over $2 million annually worth of
sales, and has appeared at a major fashion show.[45] According to a
[CNN](CNN "wikilink") correspondent: "At Seattle's Fremont Market, men
are often seen sporting the [Utilikilt](Utilikilts "wikilink")."[46] In
2003, *US News* said that "... the Seattle-made utilikilt, a rugged,
everyday riff on traditional Scottish garb, has leapt from idea to over
10,000 sold in just three years, via the Web and word of mouth
alone."[47] "They've become a common sight around Seattle, especially in
funkier neighbourhoods and at the city's many alternative cultural
events. They often are worn with chunky black boots," writes AP reporter
Anne Kim.[48] "I actually see more people wearing kilts in Seattle than
I did when I lived in Scotland," one purchaser remarked in 2003.[49]

In addition, since the mid-1990s, a number of clothing companies have
been established to sell skirts specifically designed for men. These
include Macabi Skirt in the 1990s, Menintime in 1999, Midas Clothing in
2002[50] and Skirtcraft in 2015.[51]

In 2010, the fashion chain [H&M](H&M "wikilink") featured skirts for men
in its lookbook.[52]

In 2018, [Zara](Zara_(retailer) "wikilink") added a skirt for men in its
Reshape collection.[53]

### Wicca and neo-paganism

In [Wicca](Wicca "wikilink") and [neopaganism](neopaganism "wikilink"),
especially in the United States, men (just as women) are encouraged to
question their traditional gender roles. Amongst other things, this
involves the wearing of robes at festivals and
[sabbat](Sabbath_(witchcraft) "wikilink") celebrations as ritual
clothing (which Eilers equates to the "church clothes" worn by
Christians on Sundays).[54][55] Some
[denominations](Religious_denomination "wikilink") (called 'traditions')
of Wicca even encourage their members to include
[robes](robes "wikilink"), [tunics](tunics "wikilink"),
[cloaks](cloaks "wikilink"), and other such garments in their day-to-day
wardrobes.

![](Albanian_fustanella_-_1850_-_1900.jpg "Albanian_fustanella_-_1850_-_1900.jpg")

## In non-Western cultures

Outside Western cultures, male clothing includes skirts and skirt-like
garments.[56] One common form is a single sheet of fabric folded and
wrapped around the waist, such as the
[dhoti](dhoti "wikilink")/[veshti](veshti "wikilink") or
[lungi](lungi "wikilink") in India, and [sarong](sarong "wikilink") in
[South](South_Asia "wikilink") and [Southeast
Asia](Southeast_Asia "wikilink"), and [Sri Lanka](Sri_Lanka "wikilink").
In [Myanmar](Myanmar "wikilink") both women and men wear a
[longyi](longyi "wikilink"), a wraparound tubular skirt like a sarong
that reaches to the ankles for women and to mid-calf for men.[57] There
are different varieties and names of sarong depending on whether the
ends are sewn together or simply tied. There is a difference in the way
a [dhoti](dhoti "wikilink") and [lungi](lungi "wikilink") is worn. While
a [lungi](lungi "wikilink") is more like a wrap around, wearing the
dhoti involves the creation of pleats by folding it. A dhoti also passes
between the legs making it more like a folded loose trouser rather than
a skirt.

In [Sub-Saharan Africa](Sub-Saharan_Africa "wikilink"), sarong-like
garments sometimes worn by men are known as
[kanga](Kanga_(African_garment) "wikilink") (or khanga),
[kitenge](kitenge "wikilink") (or chitenje), [kikoy](kikoy "wikilink"),
and [lappa](Wrapper_(clothing) "wikilink").[58] In
[Madagascar](Madagascar "wikilink") they are known as
[lamba](Lamba_(garment) "wikilink"). In West Africa
[Ghanaian](Ghanaian "wikilink") chiefs use the iconic
[kente](kente "wikilink") cloths for their representative chiton-like
wraparound garments. Extremely beautiful are the leather skirts and
finely embroidered tunics of the [Wodaabe](Wodaabe "wikilink") in
[Niger](Niger "wikilink"), which the men wear to display their enhanced
beauty and to impress the unmarried women on the
[Gerewol](Gerewol "wikilink") dance festials.[59] In Central Africa the
formal attire of a [Kuba](Kuba_Kingdom "wikilink") official needs a
red-black-white raffia-cloth skirt with bobble fringe.[60]

The Samoan [Lavalava](Lavalava "wikilink") is a wraparound "skirt".
These are worn by men, women and children. The women's lavalava pattern
usually have either traditional symbols and/or a flower (frangipani)
pattern. The men's lavalava have only traditional symbols. A blue
lavalava is the official skirt for the police officers uniform of
[Samoa](Samoa "wikilink").

In [Sikhism](Sikhism "wikilink"), a faith that originated in the
[Punjab](Punjab_region "wikilink"), there is a traditional dress which
is worn by both men and women, called a 'baana' or 'chola'. This dress
has a skirted bottom and is worn over long white undershorts. It was
traditionally worn in battle by [Sikh](Sikh "wikilink") warriors as it
allowed free movement and remains a part of the traditional Sikh dress
and identity.

For the [hajj](hajj "wikilink"), the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, Muslim
men wear the [ihram](ihram "wikilink"), a simple, seamless garment made
of white, terry clothlike cotton. One piece is wound skirt-like around
the lower half of the body; the other is thrown loosely over one
shoulder.[61] The [Qahtani](Qahtanite "wikilink") sheep herders in the
Southern Asir provence wear ankle-length skirt-like kilts. In
[Yemen](Yemen "wikilink") standard dress is a calf-length, wraparound
skirt, the [futah](futah "wikilink"). The
[Palestinians](Palestinians "wikilink") of the Eastern Mediterranean
traditionally wear the qumbaz, an ankle-length unisex garment, which
opens all the way down the front with the right side brought over the
left, under the arm, and then fastened.[62]

Other similar garments worn by men around the world include the Greek
and Balkan [fustanella](fustanella "wikilink") (a short flared cotton
skirt), the Pacific [lava-lava](lava-lava "wikilink") (similar to a
sarong), the Fijian [sulu vakataga](sulu_(skirt) "wikilink"),[63] some
forms of Japanese [hakama](hakama "wikilink") and the Bhutanese
[gho](gho "wikilink"). The Fijian sulu is a long bark cloth skirt for
men as well as women. It is still worn as Fijian national dress, in one
of the more obvious versions of invented traditions, though today the
cloth will be cotton or other woven material. A Fijian aristocrat will
even wear a pin-stripe sulu to accompany a dress and tie, as full court
dress.[64]

In East Asia, skirts that are called *qun* (裙) or *chang* (裳) in
[Chinese](Chinese_language "wikilink") were also worn by men as well as
dresses from ancient times until the end of the [Qing
dynasty](Qing_dynasty "wikilink") in 1911. The
[Qin](Qin_dynasty "wikilink") warriors of the first dynasty of Imperial
China, wore a skirt-like tunic and a protective cuirass of bronze plates
as can be seen on the excavated figures of the famous [Terracotta
Army](Terracotta_Army "wikilink"). Portraits and statues of the revered
Chinese scholar, [Confucius](Confucius "wikilink") show him wearing
ample, enveloping silk robes.[65]

In Japan there are two types of the [hakama](hakama "wikilink") for men
to wear, the divided umanori (馬乗り, "horse-riding hakama") and the
undivided andon hakama (行灯袴, "lantern hakama"). The umanori type has
divided legs, similar to diverted skirts and pantskirts. The hakama is
everyday attire for Shinto [kannushi](kannushi "wikilink") priests who
perform services at [shrines](shrines "wikilink"). Until the 1940s the
hakama used to be a required part of common men's wear. Today Japanese
men usually wear the hakama only on formal occasions like [tea
ceremonies](tea_ceremonies "wikilink"), weddings, and funerals. The
Hakama is also worn by practitioners of a variety of [martial
arts](martial_arts "wikilink"), such as [kendo](kendo "wikilink").[66]

## In popular culture

One notable example of men wearing skirts in fiction is in early
episodes of the science fiction TV program *[Star Trek: The Next
Generation](Star_Trek:_The_Next_Generation "wikilink")*. The uniforms
worn in the first and second season included a variant consisting of a
short sleeved top, with attached skirt. This variant was seen worn by
both male and female crew members. The book *The Art of Star Trek*
explained that "the skirt design for men 'skant' was a logical
development, given the total equality of the sexes presumed to exist in
the 24th century."[67] However, perhaps reflecting the expectations of
the audience, the "skant" was dropped by the third season of the show.

### Other examples

-   [Link](Link_(The_Legend_of_Zelda) "wikilink") from [The Legend of
    Zelda series](The_Legend_of_Zelda_series "wikilink") wear a long
    [tunic](tunic "wikilink")

### Dance

In some Western dance cultures, men commonly wear skirts and kilts.
These include a broad range of professional dance productions where they
may be worn to improve the artistic effect of the choreography,[68] a
style known as [contra dance](contra_dance "wikilink"), where they are
worn partly for ventilation and partly for the swirling movement, gay
[line dancing](line_dancing "wikilink") clubs where kilts are often
worn,[69] and revellers in Scottish nightclubs where they are worn for
ventilation and to express cultural identity.

## See also

-   [Breeching (boys)](Breeching_(boys) "wikilink")
-   [Women wearing pants](Women_and_trousers "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   [Victoria & Albert Museum, London – 'Men In Skirts' exhibition,
    2002](http://www.vam.ac.uk/vastatic/microsites/men_in_skirts/)

[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")
[Category:Men](Category:Men "wikilink") [Category:Clothing
controversies](Category:Clothing_controversies "wikilink")
[Category:Masculism](Category:Masculism "wikilink")

[1] "...\[despite\] the best efforts of designers like Jean Paul
Gaultier and others, the men's skirt has failed to gain popularity
(though the kilt appears appropriate wear for men on certain special
occasions)." Fiona Margaret Wilson (2003), *Organizational Behaviour and
Gender.* Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. , p. 199.

[2] [The
Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/Archive/Article/0,4273,4342129,00.html),
January 2002

[3] Boucher, Francois (1987): 20,000 Years of Fashion: The History of
Costume and Personal Adornment. New York: Harry N. Abrams

[4] The Bible: Genesis 12:4–5

[5] Roberts, J.M. (1998): The Illustrated History of the World.
Time-Life Books. Volume 1. p. 84

[6] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. p. 22

[7] Barber, Elisabeth J.W. (1991): Prehistoric Textiles: The Development
of Cloth in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages with Special Reference to the
Aegean. Princeton: Princeton University Press. p.12

[8] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. p. 25

[9] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. p. 24

[10] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. p. 88

[11] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. p. 89

[12] Koch-Mertens, Wiebke (2000): Der Mensch und seine Kleider: Die
Kulturgeschichte der Mode bis 1900. Düsseldorf Zürich. Artemis &
Winkler, p.114

[13] Tortora, Phyllis et. Al. (2014): Dictionary of Fashion. New York:
Fairchild Books. p.11

[14] Koch-Mertens, Wiebke (2000): Der Mensch und seine Kleider: Die
Kulturgeschichte der Mode bis 1900. Düsseldorf Zürich. Artemis &
Winkler, pp.156–162

[15] Koch-Mertens, Wiebke (2000): Der Mensch und seine Kleider: Die
Kulturgeschichte der Mode bis 1900. Düsseldorf Zürich. Artemis &
Winkler, p 130

[16] Koch-Mertens, Wiebke (2000): Der Mensch und seine Kleider: Die
Kulturgeschichte der Mode bis 1900. Düsseldorf Zürich. Artemis &
Winkler, pp. 216–217

[17] Noah Harari, Yuval (2014): Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind.
Vintage-books. pp. 168,169

[18] Ribeiro, Aileen (2003): Dress and Morality. Berg Publishers. p.
169.

[19]

[20]

[21] Ross, Robert (2008): Clothing: A Global History. Cambridge: Polity.
pp. 35,36

[22] Ross, Robert (2008): Clothing: A Global History. Cambridge: Polity.
p. 59

[23]

[24]

[25] Fogg, Marnie (2011) *The Fashion Design Directory*. London: Thames
& Hudson. p.165

[26] Fogg, Marnie (2011) *The Fashion Design Directory*. London: Thames
& Hudson. p.316

[27] Corbijn, Anton (2000): Werk. Schirmer/ Mosel (Germany). p. 70

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. p. 265

[58]

[59] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. pp. 552,560

[60] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. p. 540

[61] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. p. 53

[62] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. p. 61

[63]

[64] Ross, Robert (2008): Clothing: A Global History. Cambridge: Polity.
p. 92

[65] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. pp. 156–174

[66] Rief Anawalt, Patricia (2007): The Worldwide History of Dress.
London: Thames & Hudson. pp. 199–203

[67] Reeves-Stevens, Judith & Garfield. *The Art of Star Trek*. New
York:Pocket Books, 1995.

[68] Dance magazine, October 2000 – "Dress for Success – skirts for men
common in dance productions"
<http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1083/is_10_74/ai_65862860>

[69] Timeout magazine: London's gay Scottish linedancers