![](Mary_Quant_toont_haar_zomerlaarzen_op_schoenenbeurs_te_Utrecht_de_show,_Bestanddeelnr_922-2259.jpg "Mary_Quant_toont_haar_zomerlaarzen_op_schoenenbeurs_te_Utrecht_de_show,_Bestanddeelnr_922-2259.jpg")

A **miniskirt** (sometimes hyphenated as **mini-skirt**, separated as
**mini skirt**, or sometimes shortened to simply **mini**) is a
[skirt](skirt "wikilink") with its [hemline](hemline "wikilink") well
above the knees, generally at mid-thigh level, normally no longer than
below the buttocks;[1] and a [dress](dress "wikilink") with such a
hemline is called a **minidress** or a **miniskirt dress**. A
*micro-miniskirt* or **microskirt** is a miniskirt with its hemline at
the upper thigh, at or just below [crotch](crotch "wikilink") or
underwear level.

Short skirts have existed for a long time, though they were generally
not called "mini" or recognised as a fashion trend until the 1960s.
Instances of clothing resembling miniskirts have been identified by
archaeologists and historians as far back as c. 1390–1370 BCE. In the
early 20th century, the dancer [Josephine
Baker](Josephine_Baker "wikilink")'s banana skirt that she wore for her
mid-1920s performances in the [Folies
Bergère](Folies_Bergère "wikilink") was subsequently likened to a
miniskirt. Extremely short skirts became a staple of 20th-century
[science fiction](science_fiction "wikilink"), particularly in 1940s
pulp artwork, such as that by [Earle K.
Bergey](Earle_K._Bergey "wikilink"), who depicted futuristic women in a
"stereotyped combination" of metallic miniskirt, bra and boots.

Hemlines were just above the knee in 1961, and gradually climbed upward
over the next few years. By 1966, some designs had the hem at the upper
thigh. Stockings with suspenders (garters) were not considered practical
with miniskirts and were replaced with coloured tights. The popular
acceptance of miniskirts peaked in the "[Swinging
London](Swinging_London "wikilink")" of the 1960s, and has continued to
be commonplace, particularly among younger women and teenage girls.
Before that time, short skirts were only seen in sport and dance
clothing, such as skirts worn by female tennis players, figure skaters,
cheerleaders, and dancers.

Several designers have been credited with the invention of the 1960s
miniskirt, most significantly the London-based designer [Mary
Quant](Mary_Quant "wikilink") and the Parisian [André
Courrèges](André_Courrèges "wikilink").

## Pre-1960

![](Duan_Qun_Miao_women_from_a_One_Hundred_Miao_Pictures_album,_pre-1912.gif "fig:Duan_Qun_Miao_women_from_a_One_Hundred_Miao_Pictures_album,_pre-1912.gif")
collection.\]\]

While very short skirts have existed for a long time, they were
generally not called "mini" until the 1960s. Figurines produced by the
[Vinča culture](Vinča_culture "wikilink") (c. 5700–4500 BCE) have been
interpreted by archaeologists as representing women in miniskirt-like
garments.[2] One of the oldest surviving garments resembling a miniskirt
is the short woollen skirt with bronze ornaments worn by the [Egtved
Girl](Egtved_Girl "wikilink") for her burial in the [Nordic Bronze
Age](Nordic_Bronze_Age "wikilink") (c. 1390–1370 BCE).[3][4]

One of the earliest known cultures where women regularly wore clothing
resembling miniskirts was a subgroup of the [Miao
people](Miao_people "wikilink") of China, the Duan Qun Miao (, literally
"short skirt Miao").[5] In albums produced during the [Qing
dynasty](Qing_dynasty "wikilink") (1644–1912) from the early eighteenth
century onwards to illustrate the various types of Miao, the Duan Qun
Miao women were depicted wearing "mini skirts that barely cover the
buttocks."[6] At least one of the "One Hundred Miao Pictures" albums
contains a poem that specifically describes how the women's short skirts
and navel-baring styles were an identifier for this particular
group.[7][8]

The dancer [Josephine Baker](Josephine_Baker "wikilink")'s banana skirt
that she wore for her mid-1920s performances in the [Folies
Bergère](Folies_Bergère "wikilink") was subsequently likened to a
miniskirt.[9][10]

### Mid-20th century science fiction

![](Space_Patrol_cast_1950.JPG "fig:Space_Patrol_cast_1950.JPG")'' cast,
early 1950\]\]

Extremely short skirts became a staple of 20th-century science fiction,
particularly in 1940s pulp artwork such as that by [Earle K.
Bergey](Earle_K._Bergey "wikilink") who depicted futuristic women in a
"stereotyped combination" of metallic miniskirt, bra and boots.[11][12]
The "sci-fi miniskirt" was seen in genre films and television programmes
as well as on comic book covers.[13] The very short skirts worn by
regular female characters Carol and Tonga (played by Virginia Hewitt and
[Nina Bara](Nina_Bara "wikilink")) in the 1950–55 television series
*[Space Patrol](Space_Patrol_(1950_TV_series) "wikilink")* have been
suggested as probably the first 'micro-minis' to have been seen on
American television.[14] It was later seen as remarkable that only one
formal complaint relating to the skirts could be recalled, and that by
an ad agency in relation to an upwards shot of Carol climbing a
ladder.[15] Hewitt pointed out that even though the complainant claimed
they could see up her skirt, her matching tights rendered her
effectively clothed from neck to ankle.[16] Otherwise, *Space Patrol*
was applauded for being wholesome and family-friendly, even though the
women's short skirts would have been unacceptable in other contexts.[17]
Although the 30th-century women in *Space Patrol* were empowered,
experts in their field, and largely treated as equals, "it was the
skirts that fuelled indelible memories."[18] The *Space Patrol* skirts
were not the shortest to be broadcast at the time – the German-made
American 1954 series *[Flash
Gordon](Flash_Gordon_(1954_TV_series) "wikilink")* showed [Dale
Arden](Dale_Arden "wikilink") (played by [Irene
Champlin](Irene_Champlin "wikilink")) in an even shorter skirt.[19]

## 1960s

The manager of an unnamed shop in London's Oxford Street began
experimenting in 1960 with skirt hemlines an inch above the knees of
window mannequins, and noted how positively his customers responded.[20]
Hemlines were just above the knee in 1961, and gradually climbed upward
over the next few years. By 1966, some designs had the hem at the upper
thigh. Stockings with suspenders (American English:
"[garters](wikt:garter "wikilink")") were not considered practical with
miniskirts and were replaced with coloured tights.[21] Towards the end
of the 1960s, an even shorter version, called the microskirt or
micro-mini, emerged.[22][23]

Extremely short skirts, some as much as eight inches above the knee,
were observed in Britain in the summer of 1962.[24] The young women who
wore these short skirts were called "Ya-Ya girls", a term derived from
"yeah, yeah" which was a popular [catcall](catcall "wikilink") at the
time.[25] One retailer noted that the fashion for layered net [crinoline
petticoats](crinoline "wikilink") raised the hems of short skirts even
higher.[26] The designer [Mary Quant](Mary_Quant "wikilink") was quoted
as saying that "short short skirts" indicated youthfulness which was
seen as desirable, fashion-wise.[27]

The earliest known reference to the miniskirt is in a humorous 1962
article datelined Mexico City and describing the "mini-skirt" or "Ya-Ya"
as a controversial item of clothing that was the latest thing on the
production line there. The article characterized the miniskirt as
stopping eight inches above the knee. It referred to a writing by a
psychiatrist, whose name it did not provide, who had argued that the
miniskirt was a youthful protest of international threats to peace. Much
of the article described the reactions of men, who were said to favor
the fashion on young women to whom they were unrelated, but to oppose it
on their own wives and fiancés.[28]

In the UK, by shortening the skirts to less than they were classed as
children's garments rather than adult clothes. Children's clothing was
not subject to [purchase tax](purchase_tax "wikilink") whereas adult
clothing was.[29] The avoidance of tax meant that the price was
correspondingly less.[30][31]

### Designer claims

Several designers have been credited with the invention of the 1960s
miniskirt, most significantly the London-based designer [Mary
Quant](Mary_Quant "wikilink") and the Parisian [André
Courrèges](André_Courrèges "wikilink"). Although Quant reportedly named
the skirt after her favourite make of car, the
[Mini](Mini "wikilink"),[32][33] there is no consensus as to who
designed it first. [Valerie Steele](Valerie_Steele "wikilink") has noted
that the claim that Quant was first is more convincingly supported by
evidence than the equivalent Courrèges claim.[34] However, the
contemporary fashion journalist [Marit Allen](Marit_Allen "wikilink"),
who edited the influential "Young Ideas" pages for UK
[*Vogue*](Vogue_(British_magazine) "wikilink"), firmly stated that the
British designer [John Bates](John_Bates_(designer) "wikilink") was the
first to offer fashionable miniskirts.[35] Other designers, including
[Pierre Cardin](Pierre_Cardin "wikilink") and [Yves Saint
Laurent](Yves_Saint_Laurent_(designer) "wikilink"), had also been
raising hemlines at the same time.[36]

Mary Quant

The miniskirt is one of the garments most widely associated with Mary
Quant.[37] Quant herself is ambivalent about the claim that she invented
the miniskirt, stating that her customers should take credit, as she
herself wore very short skirts, and they requested even shorter hemlines
for themselves.[38] Regardless of whether or not Quant invented the
miniskirt, it is widely agreed that she was one of its highest-profile
champions.[39][40][41] Quant loved [Mini
Cooper](Mini#Mini_Cooper_and_Cooper_S:_1961–2000 "wikilink") cars and
named the garment after them, saying that car and skirt were both
"optimistic, exuberant, young, flirty", and complemented each
other.[42][43]

Quant had started experimenting with shorter skirts in the late 1950s,
when she started making her own designs up to stock her boutique on the
King's Road.[44] Among her inspirations was the memory of seeing a young
tap-dancer wearing a "tiny skirt over thick black tights", influencing
her designs for young, active women who did not wish to resemble their
mothers.[45][46] In addition to the miniskirt, Quant is often credited
with inventing the coloured and patterned [tights](tights "wikilink")
that tended to accompany the garment, although their creation is also
attributed to the Spanish couturier [Cristóbal
Balenciaga](Cristóbal_Balenciaga "wikilink") who offered
[harlequin](harlequin "wikilink")-patterned tights in 1962[47][48] or to
Bates.[49]

In 2009, a Mary Quant minidress was among the 10 British "design
classics" featured on a series of [Royal Mail](Royal_Mail "wikilink")
stamps, alongside the [Tube map](Tube_map "wikilink"), the
[Spitfire](Spitfire "wikilink"), and the [red telephone
box](red_telephone_box "wikilink").[50]

André Courrèges

Courrèges explicitly claimed that he invented the mini, and accused
Quant of only "commercialising" it.[51] He presented short skirts
measuring four inches above the knee in January 1965 for that year's
Spring/Summer collection,[52] although some sources claim that Courrèges
had been designing miniskirts as early as 1961, the year he launched his
couture house.[53] The collection, which also included [trouser
suits](pantsuit "wikilink") and cut-out backs and midriffs, was designed
for a new type of athletic, active young woman.[54] Courrèges had
presented "above-the-knee" skirts in his August 1964 haute couture
presentation which was proclaimed the "best show seen so far" for that
season by *[The New York Times](The_New_York_Times "wikilink")*.[55] The
Courrèges look, featuring a knit [bodystocking](bodystocking "wikilink")
with a [gabardine](gabardine "wikilink") miniskirt slung around the
hips, was widely copied and plagiarised, much to the designer's chagrin,
and it would be 1967 before he again held a press showing for his
work.[56] Steele has described Courrèges's work as a "brilliant couture
version of youth fashion" whose sophistication far outshone Quant's
work, although she champions the Quant claim.[57] Others, such as Jess
Cartner-Morley of *[The Guardian](The_Guardian "wikilink")* explicitly
credit him, rather than Quant, as the miniskirt's creator.[58]

John Bates and others

![](1965_John_Bates_for_Jean_Varon_mindress_01.jpg "fig:1965_John_Bates_for_Jean_Varon_mindress_01.jpg")''.[59]\]\]

The idea that John Bates, rather than Quant or Courrèges, innovated the
miniskirt had an influential champion in [Marit
Allen](Marit_Allen "wikilink"), who as editor of the influential "Young
Ideas" pages for UK [*Vogue*](Vogue_(British_magazine) "wikilink"), kept
track of up-and-coming young designers.[60] In 1966 she chose Bates to
design her mini-length wedding outfit in white gabardine and silver
[PVC](PVC "wikilink").[61] In January 1965 Bates's "skimp dress" with
its "short-short skirt" was featured in *Vogue,* and would later be
chosen as the [Dress of the
Year](Dress_of_the_Year "wikilink").[62][63][64] Bates was also famous
for having designed mini-coats and dresses and other outfits for [Emma
Peel](Emma_Peel "wikilink") (played by [Diana
Rigg](Diana_Rigg "wikilink")) in the TV series *[The
Avengers](The_Avengers_(TV_series) "wikilink")*, although the
manufacturers blocked his request for patterned tights to enable Emma
Peel to fight in skirts if necessary.[65][66]

An alternative origin story for the miniskirt came from [Barbara
Hulanicki](Barbara_Hulanicki "wikilink") of the London boutique
[Biba](Biba "wikilink"), who recalled that in 1966 she received a
delivery of stretchy [jersey](jersey_(fabric) "wikilink") skirts that
had shrunk drastically in transit. Much to her surprise, the ten-inch
long garments rapidly sold out.[67]

In 1967 [Rudi Gernreich](Rudi_Gernreich "wikilink") was among the first
American designers to offer miniskirts, in the face of strongly worded
censure and criticism from American couturiers [James
Galanos](James_Galanos "wikilink") and [Norman
Norell](Norman_Norell "wikilink").[68] Criticism of the miniskirt also
came from the Paris couturier [Coco Chanel](Coco_Chanel "wikilink"), who
declared the style "disgusting" despite being herself famed for
supporting shorter skirts in the 1920s.[69]

### Reception

![](Twirling_model_in_miniskirt_and_tights_at_Mary_Quant_fashion_show,_Utrecht,_24_March_1969_crop.jpg "fig:Twirling_model_in_miniskirt_and_tights_at_Mary_Quant_fashion_show,_Utrecht,_24_March_1969_crop.jpg").\]\]
Owing to Quant's position in the heart of fashionable "[Swinging
London](Swinging_London "wikilink")", the miniskirt was able to spread
beyond a simple street fashion into a major international trend. The
style came into prominence when [Jean
Shrimpton](Jean_Shrimpton "wikilink") wore [a short white shift
dress](White_shift_dress_of_Jean_Shrimpton "wikilink"), made by Colin
Rolfe, on 30 October 1965 at Derby Day, first day of the annual
[Melbourne Cup](Melbourne_Cup "wikilink") Carnival in Australia, where
it caused a sensation. According to Shrimpton, who claimed that the
brevity of the skirt was due mainly to Rolfe's having insufficient
material, the ensuing controversy was as much as anything to do with her
having dispensed with a hat and gloves, seen as essential accessories in
such a conservative society.[70][71]

Upper garments, such as rugby shirts, were sometimes adapted as
mini-dresses. With the rise in hemlines, the wearing of tights or
[pantyhose](pantyhose "wikilink"), in place of
[stockings](stockings "wikilink"), became more common. Some European
countries banned mini-skirts from being worn in public, claiming they
were an invitation to rapists. In response, Quant retorted that there
was clearly no understanding of the tights worn underneath.[72]

The response to the miniskirt was particularly harsh in Africa, where
many state governments saw them as an un-African garment and part of the
corrupting influence of the West.[73] Young city-dwelling African women
who wore Western clothing such as the miniskirt were particularly at
risk of attack based on their clothing, although Robert Ross notes that
gender roles and politics were also a key factor.[74] The urban woman
earning her own living and independence was seen as a threat to
masculine authority, particularly if she wore clothing seen as
un-African.[75] Short skirts were seen as indicating that their wearer
was a prostitute, and by conflation, a witch who drained male-dominated
society of its vitality and energy.[76] In addition to prostitute and
witches, miniskirts also became associated with secretaries, schoolgirls
and undergraduates, and young women with "[sugar
daddies](wikt:sugar_daddy "wikilink")" as lovers or boyfriends.[77]
Andrew M. Ivaska has noted that these various tropes boiled down to a
basic fear of female power, fear that a woman would use her education or
sexual power to control men and/or achieve her own independence, and
that the miniskirt therefore became a tangible object of these
fears.[78]

In 1968 the Youth League of [Tanzania](Tanzania "wikilink")'s ruling
[TANU](Tanganyika_African_National_Union "wikilink") party launched
Operation Vijana.[79] Organised and run by young men, Vijana was a
morality campaign targeting indecent clothing, which led to attacks on
women with at least one stoning reportedly triggered by the victim's
miniskirt.[80] Gangs of youths patrolled bus stations and streets
looking for women dressed "inappropriately", and dealing out physical
attacks and beatings.[81] In [Ethiopia](Ethiopia "wikilink"), an attack
on women wearing miniskirts triggered a riot of [leftist
students](Ethiopian_Student_Movement "wikilink") in which a hundred cars
were set on fire and fifty people injured.[82]

[Kamuzu Banda](Kamuzu_Banda "wikilink"), president of
[Malawi](Malawi "wikilink"), described miniskirts as a "diabolic fashion
which must disappear from the country once and for all."[83] It is also
reported that [Kenneth Kaunda](Kenneth_Kaunda "wikilink"), president of
[Zambia](Zambia "wikilink"), cited [apartheid](apartheid "wikilink") and
the miniskirt as his two primary hates.[84] By the mid-1970s the
[Zanzibar](Zanzibar "wikilink") revolutionary party had forbidden both
women and men from wearing a long list of garments, hairstyles and
cosmetics, including miniskirts.[85]

## Post-1960s

### 1970s

From 1969 onwards, the fashion industry largely returned to longer
skirts such as the *midi* and the *maxi*. Journalist [Christopher
Booker](Christopher_Booker "wikilink") gave two reasons for this
reaction: firstly, that "there was almost nowhere else to go ... the
mini-skirts could go no higher"; and secondly, in his view, "dressed up
in mini-skirts and shiny [PVC](Polyvinyl_chloride "wikilink")
[macs](Mackintosh "wikilink"), given such impersonal names as 'dolly
birds', girls had been transformed into throwaway plastic objects".[86]
Certainly this lengthening of hemlines coincided with the growth of the
[feminist](feminist "wikilink") movement. However, in the 1960s the mini
had been regarded as a symbol of liberation, and it was worn by some,
such as [Germaine Greer](Germaine_Greer "wikilink") and, in the
following decade, [Gloria Steinem](Gloria_Steinem "wikilink").[87] Greer
herself wrote in 1969 that:

Although they disappeared from mainstream fashion by the mid-70s,
miniskirts never entirely went away. This was evidenced by [Deborah
Harry](Debbie_Harry "wikilink") of the group
[Blondie](Blondie_(band) "wikilink"), who often wore miniskirts during
the "new wave" era of the late 70s; and by the female cast members of
the TV show *[Hee Haw](Hee_Haw "wikilink")*, who were known as the "Hee
Haw Honeys", who always wore country-style minidresses even during the
miniskirt's fashion hiatus in the late 70s and early 80s; and as
mentioned above, by female tennis players, figure skaters, cheerleaders,
and dancers. The song "(I Don't Want to Go to) Chelsea" (1978), by new
wave artist [Elvis Costello](Elvis_Costello "wikilink"), contained the
line: "There's no place here for the mini-skirt waddle".

![](Rah_rah_skirt.jpg "fig:Rah_rah_skirt.jpg"))\]\]

### 1980s and 1990s

In spring of 1982 (as featured in the June issue of *Time Magazine* that
year), short skirts began to re-emerge, notably in the form of
"[rah-rahs](Rah-rah_skirt "wikilink")", which were modeled on those worn
by female cheerleaders at sporting and other events. In 1985, the
British designer [Vivienne Westwood](Vivienne_Westwood "wikilink")
offered her first "mini-crini", an abbreviated version of the Victorian
[crinoline](crinoline "wikilink").[88] Its mini-length, bouffant
silhouette inspired the puffball skirts widely presented by more
established designers such as [Christian
Lacroix](Christian_Lacroix "wikilink").[89][90] In 1989, Westwood's
mini-crini was described as having combined two conflicting ideals – the
crinoline, representing a "mythology of restriction and encumbrance in
woman's dress", and the "equally dubious mythology of liberation"
associated with the miniskirt.[91]

From the 1980s, many women began to incorporate the miniskirt into their
business attire, a trend which grew during the remainder of the century.
The titular character of the 1990s television program *[Ally
McBeal](Ally_McBeal "wikilink")*, a lawyer portrayed by [Calista
Flockhart](Calista_Flockhart "wikilink"), has been credited with
popularising micro-skirts.[92]

The very short skirt is an element of Japanese [school
uniform](school_uniform "wikilink"), which since the 1990s has been
exploited by young women who are part of the *[kogal](kogal "wikilink")*
(or *[gyaru](gyaru "wikilink")*) subculture as part of their look.[93]
*Gyaru* deliberately wear their skirts short enough to reveal
[panties](panties "wikilink") (actually a second pair worn over actual
knickers) as a form of exhibitionism known as
*[panchira](panchira "wikilink")*.[94]

### 2000s and 2010s

In the early 2000s, micro-minis were once again revived.[95] In 2003,
[Tom Ford](Tom_Ford "wikilink"), at that time described as one of the
few designers able to effortlessly dictate changes in fashion, stated
that micro-skirts would be the height of fashion for Spring/Summer
2003.[96] For fashionable wear, early 21st century microskirts were
often worn with [leggings](leggings "wikilink") or
[tights](tights "wikilink") in order to avoid revealing too much.[97] At
this time, an even briefer version of the micro-mini emerged, creating a
garment sometimes described as a "belt-skirt."

![](LG_시네마_3D_TV_새_모델_‘소녀시대’_영입.jpg "fig:LG_시네마_3D_TV_새_모델_‘소녀시대’_영입.jpg")
in various styles of mini- and micro-mini dresses. South Korea,
2012.\]\]

A BBC article in 2014 wrote that miniskirts remained as contemporary a
garment as ever, retaining their associations with youth.[98] In an
early 2010s study the department store [Debenhams](Debenhams "wikilink")
found that women continued buying miniskirts up to the age of 40, whilst
1983 studies showed that 33 years old was when the average woman had
stopped buying them.[99] Debenham's report concluded that by the 2020s,
miniskirts would be seen as a wardrobe staple for British women in their
40s and early 50s.[100]

Despite this, in the early 21st century, miniskirts are still seen as
controversial, and remain subject to bans and regulation.[101] [Valerie
Steele](Valerie_Steele "wikilink") told the BBC in 2014 that even though
miniskirts no longer had the power to shock in most Western cultures,
she would hesitate to wear one in most parts of the world.[102] She
described the garment as symbolic of looking forward to future freedom
and backwards to a "much more restricted past." and noted that
international rises in extreme conservatism and religious fundamentalism
had led to an [anti-women](misogyny "wikilink") backlash, some of which
was shown through censure and criticism of women wearing "immodest"
clothing.[103] In 2010, the mayor of [Castellammare di
Stabia](Castellammare_di_Stabia "wikilink") in Italy ordered that police
fine women for wearing "very short" miniskirts.[104][105] In the 2000s,
a ban on miniskirts at a teacher's college in
[Kemerovo](Kemerovo "wikilink") was claimed by lawyers to be against the
terms of equality and human rights as laid out by the Russian
constitution, whilst in [Chile](Chile "wikilink"), the women's minister,
[Carolina Schmidt](Carolina_Schmidt "wikilink"), described a regional
governor's ban on public employees wearing minis and
[strapless](strapless_dress "wikilink") tops as "absolute nonsense" and
challenged their right to regulate other people's clothing.[106] In July
2010, [Southampton](Southampton "wikilink") city council also tried to
regulate their female employees's wardrobes, telling them to avoid
miniskirts and dress "appropriately."[107]

Miniskirts regularly appear in Africa as part of controversies,
something that has continued since the 1960s.[108] In the early 21st
century alone, instances have included a proposed ban on miniskirts in
[Uganda](Uganda "wikilink") justified by claiming that they were a
dangerous distraction to drivers and would cause road accidents, and in
2004, a leaflet campaign in [Mombasa](Mombasa "wikilink") instructed
women to dress modestly and "shun miniskirts", leading to the
[Kenyan](Kenya "wikilink") government denying that they wanted a
ban.[109] Since the 1990s, women perceived to be "indecently dressed"
might be stripped in public often by gangs of men, but sometimes by
other women.[110] These acts took place in Kenya,
[Zambia](Zambia "wikilink") and elsewhere, including incidents in
[Johannesburg](Johannesburg "wikilink") in 2008 and 2011 which led to
similar attacks in various states including [Sudan](Sudan "wikilink"),
[Malawi](Malawi "wikilink"), [Zimbabwe](Zimbabwe "wikilink") and
elsewhere.[111] The President of Malawi, [Bingu wa
Mutharika](Bingu_wa_Mutharika "wikilink"), was forced to make a
statement in 2012 after male gangs forcibly stripped women in
[Lilongwe](Lilongwe "wikilink") and [Mzuzu](Mzuzu "wikilink").[112] By
this point, "miniskirt protests" regularly followed these acts of
violence, with the protesters defiantly wearing miniskirts.[113] In late
February 2010, a group of about 200 Ugandan women demonstrated against a
so-called "miniskirt law", an anti-pornography legislation which
specifically forbade women to dress "in a manner designed to sexually
excite", or from wearing clothing that revealed their thighs and/or
other body parts.[114] Uganda revisited their proposed ban in 2013, with
[Simon Lokodo](Simon_Lokodo "wikilink"), Minister of Ethics and
Integrity, proposing another anti-pornography bill which would outlaw
revealing "intimate parts", defined as "anything above the knee", and
vowing that women who wore miniskirts would be arrested.[115] While most
of these proposed bans come from male politicians, in 2009 [Joice
Mujuru](Joice_Mujuru "wikilink"), Zimbabwe's Vice President, had to deal
with rumours that she intended to ban miniskirts and trousers for
women.[116] In Africa, one of the main issues with the miniskirt since
the 1960s is that it is seen as representative of protest against
predominantly male authority, an accusation also applied to trousers for
women which are perceived as blurring the gender divide.[117][118][119]

## See also

-   [Hotpants](Hotpants "wikilink")

## References

Sources

-

## External links

-

[Category:1960s fads and
trends](Category:1960s_fads_and_trends "wikilink") [Category:1960s
fashion](Category:1960s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1970s
fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1980s
fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:Articles
containing video
clips](Category:Articles_containing_video_clips "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")

[1] Sophie George, *Le Vêtement de A à Z*, , p.100.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20] Montreal Gazette, May 28, 1960, page 2

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28] John Abney, "Yahoo! The Ya-Ya!" *Billings Gazette*, Aug. 6, 1962,
p. 6.

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70] Shrimpton, Jean (1990). *An Autobiography*.

[71] Kimball, Duncan (2002-09-12). Jean Shrimpton in Melbourne. Milesago
article on Jean Shrimpton also known as jean shrimpTON, modified
"Thursday, 12 September 2002 10:48:55". Retrieved from
<http://www.milesago.com/Features/shrimpton.htm>.

[72] Adburgham, Alison (1967-10-10). Mary Quant. Interview with Alison
Adburgham, *The Guardian*, 10 October 1967. Retrieved from
<http://century.guardian.co.uk/1960-1969/Story/0,6051,106475,00.html>.

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86] Christopher Booker (1980) *The Seventies*

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]