![](National_liberation_skirt_with_National_Institute_stamp_1946.JPG "fig:National_liberation_skirt_with_National_Institute_stamp_1946.JPG").\]\]
A **national liberation skirt** () or **national celebration skirt** ()
is a style of [skirt](skirt "wikilink"), handmade of
[patchwork](patchwork "wikilink") and
[embroidery](embroidery "wikilink"), in celebration of Dutch [Liberation
Day](Liberation_Day_(Netherlands) "wikilink") on 5 May 1945. The style
was invented by resistance fighter and feminist [Mies Boissevain-van
Lennep](Mies_Boissevain-van_Lennep "wikilink"). The has been described
as "a female mode of political expression ... \[which\] explicitly
linked gender to the reconstruction of a ravaged country and the general
striving for 'breakthrough' and social renewal."[1]

## History

[Boissevain-van Lennep](Mies_Boissevain-van_Lennep "wikilink") had been
imprisoned in 1943 for her involvement with the [Dutch
resistance](Dutch_resistance "wikilink") to the [Nazi occupation of the
Netherlands](History_of_the_Netherlands_(1939–1945) "wikilink") during
World War II. Soon after, a scarf was smuggled into her cell that had
been constructed of textile patches of personal significance—including a
piece of her first [ballgown](ballgown "wikilink") and pieces from her
children's clothing.[2][3][4] As a member of a post-war women's
committee intending to celebrate the rebuilding of the Netherlands and
inspired by her memory of that scarf, she devised a skirt to represent
"unity in diversity" (); "new from old" (); "building from the broken"
() and "one garment makes unity" ()."[5] She called it the .[6][7]

## Concept

The idea was that these unique skirts would be worn during national
holidays and similar events as a symbol of both individuality and
national unity.[8][9] In the words of a song composed in honour of the
idea: "Weave the pattern of your life into your skirt" (.[10] Through
handmade patchwork, the skirts also literally symbolised the concept of
postwar reconstruction.[11]

![](Tentoonstelling_'Oud_Ede'.jpg "fig:Tentoonstelling_'Oud_Ede'.jpg")"
(1980), [Ede Historical
Museum](Ede_Historical_Museum "wikilink").[12]\]\]

To ensure that all were handmade, the [International Archives for the
Women's
Movement](International_Archives_for_the_Women's_Movement "wikilink")
was assigned responsibility for registering and numbering each
skirt.[13][14] More than 4,000 received official registration.[15]

## Use and legacy

At the request of the (NIB), Boissevain-van Lennep travelled to the
United States in 1949, visiting 27 states and championing the "Magic
Skirts of Reconstruction".[16] Her preferred nickname was "levensrok"
(skirt of life) while others in the Netherlands used "bevrijdingsrok"
(liberation skirt) or "oranjerok" (orange skirt, referring to the [House
of Orange](House_of_Orange-Nassau "wikilink"), the reigning Dutch royal
family).[17] Each had one or more triangles sewn near the front hem on
which the date of the [Dutch Liberation
Day](Liberation_Day_(Netherlands) "wikilink"), 5 May 1945, was
embroidered; some also had the dates of later celebrations in which the
makers participated.[18][19] Prominent among the colours in these were
the [Dutch national colours](Flag_of_the_Netherlands "wikilink"): red,
white, blue, and orange.[20] The skirts were individually registered in
a national archive under the names of their makers, and their
identification number was often embroidered into the skirt itself.[21]

On 2 September 1948, some 1500 women wearing took part in a parade in
Amsterdam marking the [Golden Jubilee](Golden_Jubilee "wikilink") of
[Queen Wilhelmina](Wilhelmina_of_the_Netherlands "wikilink")'s
coronation and coinciding with the exhibition .[22][23]

Some of these skirts are now in the collections of museums, including
the [Rijksmuseum](Rijksmuseum "wikilink"), the [National Liberation
Museum](National_Liberation_Museum_1944-1945 "wikilink"), and the
[Textile Research Centre](Textile_Research_Centre,_Leiden "wikilink") in
Leiden.[24][25] The [Verzetsmuseum](Verzetsmuseum "wikilink")
(Resistance Museum) in Amsterdam holds Mies Boissevain-van Lennep's own
.[26]

<File:National> liberation skirt, 4 May 1946.JPG <File:National>
liberation skirt with National Institute registration stamp 1948.JPG
<File:National> liberation skirt with National Institute registration
stamp 1947.JPG <File:National> liberation skirt with National Institute
registration stamp 1946, blue edge with date 5 May 1945.JPG

## See also

-   [Folk costume](Folk_costume "wikilink")
-   [Netherlands in World War
    II](Netherlands_in_World_War_II "wikilink")

## References

## External links

-   Aggregated search results for "[Nationale
    feestrok](https://www.europeana.eu/portal/en/search?q=Nationale%20feestrok)"
    from several cultural heritage organisations on
    *[Europeana](Europeana "wikilink")*.

[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink") [Category:Dutch
clothing](Category:Dutch_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Textile
arts](Category:Textile_arts "wikilink") [Category:1940s in the
Netherlands](Category:1940s_in_the_Netherlands "wikilink")
[Category:Aftermath of World War II in the
Netherlands](Category:Aftermath_of_World_War_II_in_the_Netherlands "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]