![](Pareu_(Cook_Islands).jpg "fig:Pareu_(Cook_Islands).jpg")\]\]

The **pāreu** or **pareo** (see below) is the [Cook
Islands](Cook_Islands "wikilink") and
[Tahitian](Tahitian_language "wikilink") word for a wraparound
[skirt](skirt "wikilink"). Originally it was used only to refer to
women's skirts, as men wore a [loincloth](loincloth "wikilink"), called
a *[maro](maro_(loincloth) "wikilink")*. Nowadays the term is applied to
any piece of cloth worn wrapped around the body, worn by males or
females. It is related to the [Malay](Malay_people "wikilink")
[sarong](sarong "wikilink"), [Sāmoan](Samoa "wikilink")
[lavalava](lavalava "wikilink"), [Tongan](Tonga "wikilink")
[tupenu](tupenu "wikilink") and other such garments of the Pacific
Islands such as the islands of [Hawaiʻi](Hawaiʻi "wikilink"),
[Marquesas](Marquesas "wikilink"), [Aotearoa](Aotearoa "wikilink"), and
[Fiji](Fiji "wikilink").

## Etymology

In contemporary Tahitian the right word is *pāreu*
([singular](Grammatical_number "wikilink"): te pāreu,
[plural](plural "wikilink"): te mau pāreu), with the pronunciation of
the word with a long *a* (hold the sound for two beats rather than just
one) and the *e* and *u* pronounced separately, rather than slurred into
a diphthong: \[pɑːreu\]. It is not clear where the variant *pareo* comes
from. It might be an old dialectic variant or an early explorers'
misinterpretation. But both terms were already used in the 19th century
(the [Dutch](Netherlands "wikilink") geographic magazine *De Aarde en
haar Volken* of 1887 had a few South-seas articles, some of them using
pāreu, others pareo). Nowadays, however, *pareo* can be considered as
the English-language form of the word (plural *pareos*), much less
likely subject to mispronunciation.

## Styles

[left](image:Pareu_haka.jpg "wikilink") The Tahitian pāreu are among the
most colourful and bright of the Pacific. Originally flower patterns,
the [hibiscus](hibiscus "wikilink") flowers in particular, or
traditional [tapa](tapa_cloth "wikilink") patterns, were printed in
bright colours on a cotton sheet of about 90 or 120 cm wide and 180 cm
long. Nowadays they are also made in Tahiti itself and dye painting with
varying colours is popular as well.

A pāreu can be worn in many ways. Women will usually wrap it around
their upper body, covering it from breasts to above the knees. Either
they rely on their breasts for it not to slide down, or they may wrap a
corner around their shoulder or their neck. In more traditional
surroundings the covering of the upper body is less important, but the
covering of the thighs is. Then it is worn as a longer skirt. Men wear
it as a short skirt, or may even make shorts out of it, especially when
fishing or working in the bush where freedom of movement of the legs is
needed. But during quiet, cooler nights at home, they may wear it as a
long skirt too.

The ends of the pāreu are normally tied in a knot to keep it in place.

## External links

-   [Tropic Monoi "pareo hand
    painting"](https://web.archive.org/web/20130513195144/http://www.tropic-monoi.com/en/10-pareo-sarong)

[Category:Polynesian folk
clothing](Category:Polynesian_folk_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")
[Category:Dresses](Category:Dresses "wikilink") [Category:Cook Islands
culture](Category:Cook_Islands_culture "wikilink") [Category:Tahitian
culture](Category:Tahitian_culture "wikilink") [Category:History of
Oceanian clothing](Category:History_of_Oceanian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Auckland Museum
PCAP-related](Category:Auckland_Museum_PCAP-related "wikilink")