![](Fotothek_df_roe-neg_0006721_011_Eine_Frau_präsentiert_Damenbekleidung.jpg "fig:Fotothek_df_roe-neg_0006721_011_Eine_Frau_präsentiert_Damenbekleidung.jpg")
![](Purple_Cardigan,_Black_Pencil_Skirt,_Checkered_Top,_and_Silver_Heels_(17632734246).jpg "fig:Purple_Cardigan,_Black_Pencil_Skirt,_Checkered_Top,_and_Silver_Heels_(17632734246).jpg")
A **pencil skirt** is a slim-fitting [skirt](skirt "wikilink") with a
straight, narrow cut. Generally the hem falls to, or is just below, the
knee and is tailored for a close fit. It is named for its shape: long
and slim like a [pencil](pencil "wikilink").[1][2]

## Style

The pencil skirt may be worn either as a separate piece of clothing or
as part of a [suit](suit_(clothing) "wikilink"). A pencil skirt usually
has a [vent](vent_(tailoring) "wikilink") at the back, or less commonly
at the sides, since its slim, narrow shape can otherwise restrict the
movement of the wearer. Sometimes a [kick pleat](Pleat#Kick "wikilink"),
which exposes less skin, is used instead of a vent. Pencil skirts made
from stretchy knitted fabrics do not normally need vents or pleats.

Some classic shoes for wearing with a pencil skirt are
[pumps](Court_shoe "wikilink"), or [high heels](high_heels "wikilink"),
with sheer [stockings](stockings "wikilink") or
[tights](tights "wikilink"). Back-seamed hosiery recalls the classic
pencil-skirt era of the 1950s. Pencil skirts can also be worn with flats
for a more casual, youthful appearance that echoes the 1960s. Pencil
skirts and [loafers](loafers "wikilink") are classic "Prep".

## History

Narrow-fitting skirts have a long history in western fashion. The
predecessor to the pencil skirt is the [hobble
skirt](hobble_skirt "wikilink"), a pre–World War I fad inspired by the
[Ballets Russes](Ballets_Russes "wikilink"). This full-length skirt with
a narrow hem seriously impeded walking.

The French designer [Christian Dior](Christian_Dior "wikilink")
introduced the classic modern pencil skirt in his 1954 Autumn Winter
collection.[3]

The pencil skirt quickly became very popular, particularly for [office
wear](office_wear "wikilink"). This success was due to women's desire
for new fashions in the wake of [Second World
War](Second_World_War "wikilink") and [Cold War](Cold_War "wikilink")
[rationing](rationing "wikilink"), coupled with the austere economic
climate, when fabrics were expensive.

## Wearing

The pencil skirt feels different from looser skirts, and impacts the
wearer's movements and posture. Walking needs to be done in short
strides, and entering and leaving a car gracefully takes practice. When
sitting, the legs need to be close together. Activities such as climbing
ladders and riding bicycles can be very difficult in a pencil skirt. Due
to reduced ventilation, the pencil skirt is warmer than other styles,
and it is less likely to be blown up by gusts of wind.

## References

[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink") [Category:History of
fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1940s
fashion](Category:1940s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1980s
fashion](Category:1980s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:1990s
fashion](Category:1990s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2000s
fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink") [Category:2010s
fashion](Category:2010s_fashion "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]