![](PanamenianPollera.JPG "fig:PanamenianPollera.JPG") A **pollera** is
a [Spanish](Spanish_language "wikilink") term for a big one-piece
[skirt](skirt "wikilink") used mostly in traditional festivities and
folklore throughout Spanish-speaking [Latin
America](Latin_America "wikilink"). Polleras are made from different
materials, such as cotton or wool and tend to have colorful decorations.
Most of the decorations are embroidered, flowers and regional animals
are among the most common designs found in polleras.

Polleras are a form of Spanish colonial dress enforced sometime between
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries on indigenous populations in the
Andes by [hacienda](hacienda "wikilink") owners or hacendados.
Traditional polleras come from peasant dress from southern Spanish
regions, like [Andalusia](Andalusia "wikilink"). Today, polleras are
associated with indigenous and [folkloric](folkloric "wikilink") forms
of dress.

## Spain

In Spain [skirt](skirt "wikilink") worn by women almost a century ago.
They are made of [wool](wool "wikilink") or [cotton](cotton "wikilink")
and are very colorful. The large gathered skirt is generally white with
two or three ruffles which have a floral design or
[embroidery](embroidery "wikilink"). The top has several ruffles as well
on the [shoulders](shoulder "wikilink") and has inlaid yarn. There is a
large pompom matching the yarn in the front and back of the top. The
[yarn](yarn "wikilink") also matches several large ribbons at the waist
and the slippers that go with the outfit. The clothing includes a
[headdress](Headgear "wikilink") called a *tembleque* (or *tembeleque*)
which is made of beads attached to a spring so that they tremble when
the wearer dances.

## Panama

![](PolleraPanameña(4).jpg "fig:PolleraPanameña(4).jpg") In Panama,
handmade polleras are worn during festivals or celebrations. They are
mainly made of cotton and wool. Normally, dominant color is white, and
adornments are colorful flower designs. Girls and women would generally
own two polleras during their life: one before age 16 and one at
[adulthood](adulthood "wikilink").
![](PolleraPanameña(2).jpg "fig:PolleraPanameña(2).jpg") A single
pollera can cost from several hundred to several thousands of dollars
and take up to a year to create. The [gold](gold "wikilink") and
[pearl](pearl "wikilink") *mosquetas* and *tembleques* that provides a
pollera are generally passed down as heirlooms through generations.

## Bolivia and Peru

In Bolivia and Peru the word pollera denotes a pleated skirt very much
associated with the urban [mestizo](mestizo "wikilink") and the rural
indigenous classes where women usually wear this garment (nowadays also
instead of the woven indigenous dresses). The urban pollera typical of
the [Bolivian altiplano](Altiplano "wikilink") should be made of 8
meters of cloth and it is worn with 4-5 embroidered underskirts, which
gives the Cholitas (mestizo women who wear the pollera) some "round"
lookings.

The skirt worn under the top pollera is called the fuste, under the
fuste (in the third skirt) is typically made from wool. There are still
quite a lot of women around who wear this skirt which originates from
the Spanish rural dresses and for the [Carnaval de
Oruro](Carnaval_de_Oruro "wikilink") or Virgen de la Candelaría festival
in Peru, and other festivities. During traditional festivities women who
don't usually wear it, put it on for the dancing.

## Sources

-

-

## References

<references />
[Category:Latin American
clothing](Category:Latin_American_clothing "wikilink") [Category:Latin
American culture](Category:Latin_American_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Panamanian culture](Category:Panamanian_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Folk costumes](Category:Folk_costumes "wikilink")
[Category:Colombian clothing](Category:Colombian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Venezuelan clothing](Category:Venezuelan_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Bolivian culture](Category:Bolivian_culture "wikilink")
[Category:Peruvian clothing](Category:Peruvian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")