![](Civil_war_reenactment_-_southern_woman_in_prairie_skirt.jpg "fig:Civil_war_reenactment_-_southern_woman_in_prairie_skirt.jpg")\]\]
A **prairie skirt** is an [American](United_States "wikilink") style of
[skirt](skirt "wikilink"), an article of women's and girls'
[clothing](clothing "wikilink").

Prairie skirts are slightly flared to very full, with one or more
[flounces](Flounce_(fabric) "wikilink") (deep
[ruffles](ruffle "wikilink")) or tiers, and are often worn over a
ruffled [eyelet](eyelet "wikilink") or [lace](lace "wikilink")-trimmed
[petticoat](petticoat "wikilink"). In keeping with their design
inspiration, traditional prairie skirts are usually made of "country"
fabrics such as [denim](denim "wikilink") and flowered
[calico](Calico_(fabric) "wikilink"). Prairie skirts are a staple of
women's [western wear](western_wear "wikilink"), and very full prairie
skirts are worn for [square dancing](square_dance "wikilink").

## Origins in the 19th century

Prairie skirts are so-called after their resemblance to the home-sewn
skirts worn by pioneer women in the mid-19th century, which in turn are
a simplified version of the flared, ruffled skirts characteristic of
high-fashion dresses of the 1820s. The style originated as an adaptation
of high fashion to the practicalities of rural life in the Western
United States. Deep colors and prints were used as they did not show
dirt, while decorations were used to update clothing to changing
fashions. [1]

## Revival in the 1960s and 1970s

Counterculture [Hippies](Hippies "wikilink") rejecting mainstream
fashion looked to historical and non-Western styles. While 19th century
prairie clothing was usually homemade, new companies such as [Gunne
Sax](Gunne_Sax "wikilink") in San Francisco began manufacturing ready to
wear prairie clothing. The style grew in popularity in the 1970s with
the approach of the [United States
Bicentennial](United_States_Bicentennial "wikilink") and was introduced
to high fashion by [Ralph Lauren](Ralph_Lauren "wikilink") in his fall
1978 Western-themed collection.[2]

Mid-calf length, button-front denim prairie skirts with a single
flounce, worn with a 1950s-style petticoat that was slightly longer than
the skirt, became a mainstream [fashion](fashion "wikilink") in the
1970s and early 1980s following Lauren's introduction.[3]

## 21st century

Short, many-tiered prairie skirts of [voile](voile "wikilink"),
[chiffon](chiffon_(fabric) "wikilink") or other lightweight fabrics were
a fashion trend in 2005. Some wear longer-length prairie skirts with a
slip or underskirt to preserve their modesty.

## Notes

## References

-   George-Warren, Holly, and Michelle Freedman: *How the West Was
    Worn*, Harry N. Abrams (2001), .

## See also

-   [Western wear](Western_wear "wikilink")

[Category:Western wear](Category:Western_wear "wikilink")
[Category:History of fashion](Category:History_of_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:1970s fashion](Category:1970s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:2000s fashion](Category:2000s_fashion "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")

[1]

[2] George-Warren, Holly, and Michelle Freedman: *How the West Was
Worn*, p. 184-187.

[3]