![](Marubi_photograph_woman_from_Grudë.jpg "fig:Marubi_photograph_woman_from_Grudë.jpg")
wearing a xhubleta in a 19th-century [Pietro
Marubi](Pietro_Marubi "wikilink") photo\]\] The **xhubleta** is an
undulating, bell-shaped [folk skirt](Folk_costume "wikilink"), worn by
[Albanian](Albanians "wikilink") women. It usually is hung on the
shoulders using two straps. Part of the [Albanian traditional
clothing](Albanian_traditional_clothing "wikilink") it has 13 to 17
strips and 5 pieces of felt. The bosom and the part of the xhubleta
covered by the [apron](apron "wikilink") are made out of crocheted black
wool.[1] The bell shape is accentuated in the back part.[2]

The xhubleta is a unique type of dress for its particular shape,
structure, and decorating system.[3] It is worn by Albanians in Northern
[Albania](Albania "wikilink"), [Kosovo](Kosovo "wikilink"), [North
Macedonia](North_Macedonia "wikilink") and
[Montenegro](Montenegro "wikilink"). There are two types of xhubleta:
one is narrow and the other is large.[4] In regard to colors, only two
colors are nowadays used: the white one for the unmarried women and the
black one for the married ones,[5] however in the past many colors were
used, as witnessed by a 17th-century author, who claimed that the
peacock didn't have as many colors as the xhubleta worn by the women of
[Kelmend](Kelmend_region "wikilink").[6] It is thought that the
diminishing in colors in the last two centuries is due to the limitation
of its use only in remote mountainous areas.[7]

## History

The xhubleta is speculated to have an ancient origin. It represents
similarities to wearing of some [Neolithic](Neolithic "wikilink")
figures found in [Bosnia](Bosnia "wikilink"), but also in other areas of
the [Mediterranean](Mediterranean "wikilink") region, belonging to the
second millennium BC, and linking accordingly with old Mediterranean
civilisation.[8][9]

## References

[Category:Albanian clothing](Category:Albanian_clothing "wikilink")
[Category:Skirts](Category:Skirts "wikilink")

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] <http://dtk.rks-gov.net/tkk_objekti_en.aspx?id=9827>

[9]